---
name: M4. Anthropogenic marine biome
realm: Marine
code: M4
contributors: DA Keith
---

# Description

Humans have constructed, deposited or dumped artificial structures in the oceans that either confine managed marine organisms or attract marine biota that would not otherwise occupy a location. These structures are distributed globally, but are most common in the regions of high density occupation or transit. They include shipwrecks, mineral, gas or energy infrastructure, pipelines and rubble piles, as well as aquaculture infrastructure. These installations provide an epibenthic substrate for sessile benthic organisms, as well as a demersal or pelagic environment for mobile organisms. Diversity and biomass of the epibenthic biofouling community is positively related to rugosity of the substrate. Most energy is supplied to these ecosystems from allochthonous sources, either passively via currents or actively addition by humans, as is the case in aquaculture. Epibenthic and planktonic marine algae, however, make a contribution to the energy budget through local primary production. Microbial decomposers and invertebrate detritivores in the sediments beneath and around the structures feed on particulate organic matter (waste products and decaying bodies) from the epibenthic biota or on unconsumed food delivered to managed species. The elevated productivity or visual features of artificial structures often attract larger pelagic predators, which forage preferentially in the vicinity.
