---
name: MT1. Shorelines biome
realm: Marine,Terrestrial
code: MT1
contributors: DA Keith
---

# Description

The shoreline systems biome comprises naturally formed intertidal, abiogenic habitats, situated at the interface between land and sea. The distribution of the biome spans all latitudes (temperate to polar) at which landmasses are present. Productivity ranges from high to low, is loosely proportional to the availability of stable hard substrate for macrophytic attachment, and inversely proportional to the dependency on allochthonous energy sources derived from both land and sea. Productivity is also influenced by coastal upwelling, and for ecotypes of finer particle size, the nutrient content of adjacent terrestrial sediments. Within and across ecotypes, biotic communities are strongly structured by tides, waves and particle size – which ranges from contiguous rock to fine silts and clays. Tides produce a vertical gradient of increasing aerial exposure, across which desiccation and temperature stress increases, time available for filter feeding decreases, and interactions with marine/terrestrial predators vary. In combination, waves and particle size determine substrate stability, and hence the  physical disturbance regime. Wave action, which diminishes from headlands to bays, produces horizontal gradients in community structure. Many organisms possess morphological and behavioural adaptations to prevent desiccation at low tide, and dislodgement by wave forces. Burrowing animals are important in unconsolidated sediments. Competition (especially for space) is a major factor structuring communities of contiguous rock, with its importance diminishing with decreasing particle size. Facilitative interactions – particularly those that protect organisms from desiccation stress or physical disturbance - can be important across ecosystems of all particle sizes. Biodiversity is generally high, with microscopic life forms dominating the biomass of systems of small particle size.  
