---
name: F1.1 Permanent upland streams
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.1
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, PS Giller, MC Rains, M Kelly-Quinn, AH Arthington, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:41:49
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These 1st-3rd order streams generally have steep gradients, fast flows, coarse substrates, often with a riffle-pool (shallow and fast vs deeper and slow) sequence of habitats, and periodic (usually seasonal) high-flow events. Many organisms have specialised morphological and behavioural adaptations to high flow-velocity environments. Riparian trees produce copious leaf fall that provide allochthonous subsidies, and support somewhat separate foodwebs to those based on in situ primary production by bryophytes and biofilms. Tree shade conversely light-limits productivity, a trade-off that relaxes seasonally where deciduous trees dominate. Microbes and detritivores (e.g. invertebrate shredders) break down leaf fall and other organic matter. Microbial biofilms comprising algae, fungi and bacteria establish on rocks and process dissolved organic matter. Invertebrates include shredders (consuming coarse particles), grazers (consuming biofilm), collectors and filter feeders (consuming benthic and suspended fine particles, respectively), and predators. Many benthic macroinvertebrates, mostly insects, have aquatic larvae and terrestrial adults. Filter feeders have traits adapted to swift flows, allowing them to hold fast to substrates while capturing resources, while benthic bryophytes provide shelter for other organisms. Fish are typically small predators of aquatic invertebrates and insects on the water surface. Birds typically have specialised foraging behaviours (e.g. dippers and kingfishers). Trophic cascades involving rapid algal growth, invertebrate grazers and fish are common.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Upland streams have flash flow regimes with high velocity and relatively low, but variable perennial volume. Turbulence sustains highly oxygenation. Groundwater-delivered subsidies support streamflow, with up to 50% of summer flow and 100% of winter flow originating as groundwater. This modulates stream temperatures, keeping temperatures lower in summer and higher in winter; and deliver nutrients, especially if there are N-fixing plants, along the groundwater flow path. They flow down moderate to steep slopes causing considerable erosion and sediment transport. These factors drive nutrient and organic matter transport downstream. Flow volume and variability, including periodic flood regimes, depend on rainfall seasonality, snowmelt from cold-climate catchments, as well as catchment size. Peat-rich catchments feed dark dystrophic waters to the streams.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
High proportion of global stream length. In steep to moderate terrain throughout the humid tropical and temperate zones, rarely extending to boreal latitudes.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions  (Abell et al. 2008) were initially identified as containing permanent upland streams if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identifed in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. The selected ecoregions were then clipped to exlude cold or dry climates (mean temperature of coldest quarter >0°C, mean annual preipitation >300mm) based on data from Karger et al. (2017). Major occurrences were mapped by intersecting the selected ecoregions with the distribution of 1st-3rd order streams taken from the RiverATLAS (v1.0) database at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution (Linke et al. 2019). The remaining areas within selected ecoregions (excluding freeze/thaw areas) were designated as minor occurrences.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Giller PS., Giller P., Malmqvist B (1998) **The biology of streams and rivers**. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* Meyer JL, Wallace JB (2001) **Lost linkages and lotic ecology: rediscovering small streams**. Blackwell, Oxford.
* Meyer JL, Strayer DL, Wallace JB, Eggert SL, Helfman GS, Leonard NE (2007) *The contribution of headwater streams to biodiversity in river networks*. **Journal of the American Water Resources Association** 43:  86–103.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Karger, D.N., Conrad, O., Böhner, J., Kawohl, T., Kreft, H., Soria-Auza, R.W., Zimmermann, N.E., Linder, H.P. & Kessler, M. (2017) *Climatologies at high resolution for the earth’s land surface areas*. **Scientific Data** 4, 170122.
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
