---
name: F1.2 Permanent lowland rivers
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.2
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, PS Giller, MC, Rains, AH Arthington, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-01 08:59:17
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Small-medium lowland rivers (stream orders 4-9) are productive depositional ecosystems with trophic webs that are less diverse than large lowland rivers (F1.7). Macrophytes rooted in benthos or along the river margins contribute most primary production, but allochthonous inputs from floodplains and upper catchments generally dominate energy flow in the system. The biota tolerates a range of temperatures, which  vary with catchment climate. Aquatic biota have physiological, morphological and even behavioural adaptations to lower oxygen concentrations, which may vary seasonally and diurnally. Zooplankton can be abundant in slower deeper rivers. Sessile (e.g. mussels) and scavenging (e.g. crayfish) macroinvertebrates are associated with the hyporheic zone and structurally complex microhabitats in moderate flow environments, including fine sediment and woody debris. Fish communities are diverse and may contribute to complex trophic networks. They include large predatory fish (e.g. sturgeons), smaller predators of invertebrates, herbivores, and detritivores. The feeding activities and movement of piscivorous birds (e.g. cormorants), diadromous fish (seawater-freshwater migrants), mammals (e.g. otters), and reptiles (e.g. turtles) extend trophic network beyond instream waters. Riparian zones vary in complexity from forested banks to shallow areas where emergent, floating and submerged macrophyte vegetation grows. Intermittently connected oxbow lakes or billabongs increase the complexity of associated habitats, providing more lentic waters for a range of aquatic fauna and flora.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These rivers are distinguished by shallow gradients, low turbulence, low to moderate flow velocity and moderate flow volumes (<10,000m3/s). Flows are continuous but may vary seasonally depending on catchment precipitation. This combination of features is most common at low altitudes below 200 m and rarely occurs above 1,500 m. River channels are tens to a few hundred metres wide and up to tens of metres deep with mostly soft sediment substrates. They are dominated by depositional processes. Surface water and groundwater mix in the alluvium in the hyporheic zone, which plays an important role in nutrient cycling. Overbank flows increase turbulence and turbidity. Locally or temporally important erosional processes redistribute sediment and produce geomorphically dynamic depositional features (e.g. braided channels and point bars). Nutrient levels depend on riparian/floodplain inputs and vary with catchment geochemistry. Oxygen and temperatures also vary with climate and catchment features. For catchments with extensive peatlands, waters may be tannin-rich, poorly oxygenated, acidic and dark, thus reducing productivity and diversity.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Distributed throughout tropical and temperate lowlands but very uncommon in arid zones. They are absent from boreal zones, where they are replaced by F1.3.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within these areas, major occurrences were mapped using stream orders 4-9 taken from the RiverATLAS (v1.0) database (Linke et al.2019) combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al. 2016). The remaining area of selected ecoregions was designated as minor occurrences. Occurrences were aggregated to ten minute spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Tockner K, Malard, F, Ward JV (2000) An extension of the flood pulse concept. Hydrological Processes 14: 2861-2883.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
