---
name: F1.3 Freeze-thaw rivers and streams
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.3
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, PS Giller, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

In seasonally cold montane and boreal environments, the surfaces of both small streams and large rivers freeze in winter. These systems have relatively simple trophic networks with low functional and taxonomic diversity, but the biota may include local endemics. In small, shallow streams, substrate algae are the principal autotrophs, while phytoplankton occur in larger rivers and benthic macrophytes are rare. All are seasonally inactive or curtailed when temperatures are cold and surface ice reduces light penetration through the water. Bottom-up regulatory processes dominate. Subsidies of dissolved organic carbon and nutrients from spring meltwaters and riparian vegetation along smaller streams are crucial to maintaining the detritivores that dominate the trophic network. Overall decomposition rates of coarse particles are low, but can exceed rates per degree day in warmer climates as the fauna are adapted to cold temperatures. Microbial decomposers often dominate small streams, but in larger rivers, the massive increase in fine organic particles in spring meltwaters can support abundant filter feeders which consume huge quantities of suspended particles and redeposit them within the river bed. Resident invertebrates survive cold temperatures through dormant life stages, extended life cycles and physiological adaptations. Vertebrate habitat specialists (e.g. dippers, small fish, beavers, and otters) tolerate low temperatures with traits such as subcuticular fat, thick hydrophobic, and/or aerated fur or feathers. Many fish disperse from frozen habitat to deeper water refuges during the winter (e.g. deep pools) before foraging in the meltwater streams from spring to autumn. In the larger rivers, fish, and particularly migratory salmonids returning to their natal streams and rivers for breeding, are a food source for itinerant terrestrial predators such as bears. When they die after reproduction, their decomposition in turn provides huge inputs of energy and nutrients to the system.

# Ecological Drivers

These rivers experience low winter temperatures and seasonal freeze-thaw regimes. Winter freezing is generally limited to the surface but can extend to the substrate forming ‘anchor ice’. Flows may continue below the ice or may be intermittent in smaller streams or dry climates. Freezing reduces resource availability by reducing nutrient inputs, allochthonous organic matter and light penetration through the water. Light may also be attenuated at high latitudes and by high turbidity in erosional streams. Meltwaters drive increased flow and flooding in spring and summer. Carbon and nutrient concentrations are greatest during spring floods, and pH tends to decrease with flow during spring and autumn. When catchments include extensive peatlands, waters may be tannin-rich, acidic and dark, thereby reducing light penetration and productivity.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Restricted to boreal, subarctic, alpine and subalpine regions, with limited examples in the subantarctic and Antarctic.

{% capture map_det %}
The distribution of freeze-thaw rivers and streams was mapped from the Global River Classification database (Ouellet Dallaire et al., 2018), including all reaches with minimum temperature below 0°C. Occurrences were aggregated to ten minute spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Guo LD, Cai YH, Belzile C, Macdonald RW (2012) Sources and export fluxes of inorganic and organic carbon and nutrient species from the seasonally ice-covered Yukon River. Biogeochemistry 107: 187-206.
* Olsson TI (1981) Overwintering of benthic macroinvertebrates in ice and frozen sediment in a North Swedish river. Ecography 4: 161-166.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Ouellet Dallaire, C., Lehner, B., Sayre, R., Thieme, M. (2018): *A multidisciplinary framework to derive global river reach classifications at high spatial resolution*. **Environmental Research Letters** 14: 024003. DOI: [10.1088/1748-9326/aad8e9](https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aad8e9)
