---
name: F1.4 Seasonal upland streams
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.4
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, B Robson, PS Giller, AH Arthington, M Kelly-Quinn, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:35:55
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Upland streams (orders 1-4) with highly  seasonal flows generally have low to moderate productivity and a simpler trophic structure than lowland rivers. They tend to be shallow, hence benthic algae are major contributors to in-stream food webs and productivity, but riparian zones and catchments both contribute allochthonous energy and organic carbon through leaf fall, which may include an annual deciduous component. Primary production also varies with light availability and flow. Taxonomic diversity varies between streams, but can be lower than permanent streams and relatively high in endemism. Traits that enable biota to persist in narrow and shallow channels with large seasonal variations in flow velocity, episodes of torrential flow, and seasonal desiccation include small body sizes (especially in resident fish), dormant life phases and/or burrowing (crustaceans), omnivorous diets and high dispersal ability, including seasonal migration. Compared to lowland rivers, the trophic structure has a higher representation of algal and omnivorous feeders and low numbers of larger predators. Birds show specialist feeding strategies (e.g. dippers). Diversity and abundance of invertebrates and their predators (e.g. birds) fluctuate in response to seasonal flood regimes.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Flow and flood regimes in these rivers are highly variable between marked wet and dry seasons, with associated changes in water quality as solute concentration varies with volume. They may be perennial, with flows much-reduced in the dry season, or seasonally intermittent with flows ceasing and water persisting in isolated stagnant pools. Channels are narrow with steep to moderate gradients, seasonally high velocity and sometimes large volumes of water, producing overbank flows. This results in considerable turbulence, turbidity, and erosion during the wet season and coarse substrates (cobbles and boulders). Seasonal floods are critical to allochtonous subsidies and downstream exports of organic matter and nutrients.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Elevated regions in seasonal tropical, subtropical and temperate climates worldwide. 

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within the selected ecoregions, major occurrences were mapped using 1st-4th order streams (3km buffer) taken from the RiverATLAS (v1.0) database (Linke et al. 2019). The remaining areas of selected ecoregions were mapped as minor occurrences. Occurrences were aggregated to ten minute spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Davies PM, Bunn SE, Hamilton SK (2008) Primary production in tropical streams and rivers. In: Tropical stream ecology (Ed. D Dudgeon), pp. 23–42. Academic Press, London.
* de Carvalho RA., Tejerina-Garro FL. (2018) Headwater-river gradient: trait-based approaches show functional dissimilarities among tropical fish assemblages. Marine and Freshwater Research 69: 574-584.
* Datry T, Bonada N, Boulton A (2017) ‘Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams: ecology and management.’ (Academic Press: Burlington)
* Jardine RD, Bond NR, Burford MA, Kennard MJ, Ward DP, Bayliss P, Davies PM, Douglas MM, Hamilton SK, Melack JM, Naiman RJ, Pett NE, Pusey BJ, Warfe DM, Bunn SE (2015) 2015 by the Ecological Society of America Does flood rhythm drive ecosystem responses in tropical riverscapes? Ecology 96, 684–692 
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
