---
name: F1.5 Seasonal lowland rivers
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.5
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, B Robson, PS Giller, AH Arthington, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-24 15:25:32
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These large riverine systems (stream orders 5-9) can be highly productive with trophic structures and processes shaped by seasonal hydrology and linkages to floodplain wetlands. In combination with biophysical heterogeneity, this temporal variability promotes functional diversity in the biota. Although trophic networks are complex due to the diversity of food sources and the extent of omnivory amongst consumers, food chains tend to be short and large mobile predators such as otters, large piscivorous waterbirds, sharks, dolphins, and crocodilians (in the tropics) can have a major impact on the food webs. Benthic algae are key contributors to primary productivity, although macrophytes become more important during the peak and late wet season when they also provide substrate for epiphytic algae. Rivers receive very significant resource subsidies from both algae and macrophytes on adjacent floodplains when they are connected by flows. Enhanced longitudinal hydrological connectivity during the wet season enables fish and other large aquatic consumers to function as mobile links, extending floodplain and estuarine resource subsidies upstream. Life cycle processess including reproduction, recruitment, and dispersal in most biota are tightly cued to seasonally high flow periods, often with floodplain nursery areas for river fish, amphibians and larger invertebrates.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These rivers are driven by cyclical, seasonal flow regimes. High-volume flows and floods occur during summer in the tropics or winter-spring at temperate latitudes, with two peaks in some areas. A decline of flows and reduced flood residence times during the transition to the dry season is followed by low and disconnected flows during the dry season. Turbidity, light availability, erosion, sedimentation, lateral and longitudinal connectivity, biological activity, dissolved oxygen and solute concentrations all vary with this seasonal cycle. The inter-annual variability of this pattern depends on the catchment precipitation and sources of inflow that offset or mute the influences of rainfall seasonality (e.g. snow melt in South Asia). Streams may be single, multi-channelled or complex anabranching systems.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical, subtropical and temperate lowlands with seasonal inflow patterns worldwide.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within these areas, major occurrences were mapped using stream orders 4-9 taken from the RiverATLAS (v1.0) database (Linke et al.2019) combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al. 2016). The remaining area of selected ecoregions was designated as minor occurrences. Occurrences were aggregated to ten minute spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Douglas MM, Bunn SE, Davies PM (2005) River and wetland food webs in Australia's wet-dry tropics: general principles and implications for management. Marine and Freshwater Research 56: 329-342
* Layman CA, Winemiller KO, Arrington DA, Jepsen DB (2005) Body size and trophic position in a diverse tropical food web. Ecology 86:2530-2535.
* Datry T, Bonada N, Boulton A (2017) ‘Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams: ecology and management.’ (Academic Press: Burlington)
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
