---
name: F1.6 Episodic arid rivers
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.6
biomecode: F1
contributors: JL Nel, RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, PS Giller, B Robson, AH Arthington, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Episodic rivers have high temporal variability in flows and resource availability, shaping a low-diversity biota with periodically high abundance of some organisms. Productivity is episodically high and punctuated by longer periods of low productivity (i.e. boom-bust dynamics). The trophic structure can be complex and dominated by autochthonous primary production. Even though riparian vegetation is sparse, allochthonous inputs from connected floodplains may be important. Top-down control of ecosystem structure is evident in some desert streams. Episodic rivers are hotspots of biodiversity and ecological activity in arid landscapes, acting as both evolutionary and ecological refuges. Most biota have ruderal life cycles, dormancy phases, or high mobility enabling them to tolerate or avoid long, dry periods and to exploit short pulses of high resource availability during flooding. During dry periods, many organisms survive as dormant life phases (e.g. eggs or seeds), by reducing metabolism, or by persisting in perennial refugia (e.g. waterholes, shallow aquifers). They may rapidly recolonise the channel network during flow (networkers). Waterbirds survive dry phases by moving elsewhere, returning to breed during flows. The abundance of water, nutrients and food during flows and floods initiates rapid primary production (especially by algae), breeding and recruitment. Zooplankton are abundant in slower reaches during periods of flow. Macroinvertebrates such as sessile filter-feeders (e.g. mussels) and scavengers (e.g. crayfish) may occur in moderate flow environments with complex microhabitats in fine sediment and amongst woody debris. Assemblages of fish and amphibians are dominated by small body sizes. Most fish species use inundated floodplains in larval, juvenile and mature life stages, and produce massive biomass after large floods. Organisms generally tolerate wide ranges of temperature, salinity, and oxygen.

# Ecological Drivers

These mostly lowland systems are distinguished by highly episodic flows and flood regimes that vary with catchment size and precipitation. High-volume, short duration flows (days to weeks, rarely months) punctuate long dry periods fill channels and flood wetlands. Low elevational gradients and shallow channels result in low turbulence and low to moderate flow velocity. Lowland stream channels are broad, flat, and often anastomising, with mostly soft sandy sediments. Groundwater is usually within rooting zones of perennial plants, which may establish in channels after flow events. Sediment loads drive periodically high turbidity. Locally or temporally important erosional processes have roles in geomorphic dynamism redistributing sediment in depositional features (e.g. braided channels and point bars). Upland streams are prone to erosive flash floods. High nutrient levels are due to large catchments and riparian inputs but depend on catchment geochemistry. These rivers often flow over naturally saline soils. Salinity can thus be high and increases in drying phases.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Arid and semi-arid mid-latitudes, in lowlands, and some uplands, but rarely above 1,500 m elevation.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within the selected ecoregions, remote sensing estimates of seasonal/ephemeral surface water (classes 4, 5 and 8 from Pekel et al. 2016) were used to identify major occurrences. The remaining areas of selected ecoregions were mapped as minor occurrences. We used MERIT Hydro river channels as proxies of the location of rivers and streams within these areas (Yamazaki et al. 2019).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Kingsford RT, (2006) Ecology of desert rivers. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
* Sheldon et al. (2010) Ecological roles and threats to aquatic refuges in arid landscapes: dryland river waterholes. Marine & Freshwater Research 61, 885-895
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Yamazaki D., D. Ikeshima, J. Sosa, P.D. Bates, G.H. Allen, T.M. Pavelsky
MERIT Hydro: A high-resolution global hydrography map based on latest topography datasets
Water Resources Research, vol.55, pp.5053-5073, 2019, doi: 10.1029/2019WR024873
