---
name: F1.7 Large lowland rivers
biome: F1. Rivers and streams biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F1.7
biomecode: F1
contributors: RT Kingsford, PS Giller, R Mac Nally, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:33:59
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Large lowland rivers (typically stream orders 8-12) are highly productive environments with complex trophic webs which are supported by very large flow volumes. Primary production is mostly from autochthonous phytoplankton and riparian macrophytes, with allochthonous inputs from floodplains and upper catchments generally dominating energy flow in the system. The fauna includes a significant diversity of pelagic organisms. Zooplankton are abundant, while sessile (e.g. mussels), burrowing (e.g. annelids) and scavenging (e.g. crustaceans) macroinvertebrates occur in the fine sediment and amongst woody debris. Fish communities are diverse and contribute to complex trophic networks. They include large predatory fish (e.g. freshwater sawfish, Pirhana, Alligator Gar) and in some rivers endemic River Dolphins, smaller predators of invertebrates (benthic and pelagic feeders), phytoplankton herbivores, and detritivores. The feeding activities and movement of semi-aquatic piscivorous birds (e.g. cormorants), mammals (e.g. otters), and reptiles (e.g. turtles, crocodilians) connect the trophic network to other ecosystems beyond instream waters. Riparian and large floodplain zones vary in complexity from forested banks, to productive lentic oxbow lakes and extensive and complex flooded areas where emergent and floodplain vegetation grows (e.g. reeds and macrophytes, shrubs, trees). Riparian zones can be complex but have less direct influence on large rivers than on smaller river ecosystems. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These rivers have shallow gradients with low turbulence, low to moderate flow velocity and very high flow volumes (>10,000m3/s), which are continuous but may vary seasonally depending on catchment area and precipitation (e.g. Congo up to 41,000 m3/s, Amazon up to 175,000 m3/s). River channels are wide (e.g.  Amazon River; 11 km in dry season, up to 25km when flooded at its widest point) and deep (e.g. Congo up to 200m; Mississippi up to 60m) with mostly soft sediment substrates. They are dominated by depositional processes so turbidity may be high. Overbank flows increase turbulence and turbidity. Locally or temporally important erosional processes redistribute sediment and produce geomorphically dynamic depositional features (e.g. braided channels, islands and point bars). Nutrient levels are high due to large catchments and riparian/floodplain inputs but vary with catchment geochemistry. Moderate water temperatures are buffered due to large catchments. 
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical and subtropical lowlands, with a few extending to temperate zones. They are absent from arid regions, and in boreal zones are replaced by F1.3.

{% capture map_det %}
The distribution of large lowland rivers was taken from the Global River Classification database (Ouellet Dallaire et al. 2018). Reaches with flow > 10,000 m3/s were mapped with a 20 km buffer as major occurrences, clipped to exclude those with seasonal freezing temperatures (mean temperature of coldest quarter <0°C).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Best, J (2019). Anthropogenic stresses on the world’s big rivers. Nature Geoscience 12,7-2
* Ashworth, PJ, Lewin, J (2012). How do big rivers come to be different? Earth-Science Reviews 114, 84-107
### Map References
* Ouellet Dallaire, C., Lehner, B., Sayre, R., Thieme, M. (2018): *A multidisciplinary framework to derive global river reach classifications at high spatial resolution*. **Environmental Research Letters** 14: 024003. DOI: [10.1088/1748-9326/aad8e9](https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aad8e9)
