---
name: F2.10 Subglacial lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.10
biomecode: F2
contributors: DA Keith, MJ Siegert
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-08-17 10:38:38
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Remarkable lacustrine ecosystems occur beneath permanent ice sheets. They are placed within the Lakes biome (biome F2) due to their relationships with some Freeze-thaw lakes (F2.4), but they share several key features with the Subterranean freshwater biome (biome SF1). Evidence of their existence first emerged in 1973 from airborne radar-echo sounding imagery, which penetrates the ice cover and shows lakes as uniformly flat structures with high basal reflectivity. The biota of these ecosystems is very poorly known due to technological limitations on access and concerns about the risk of contamination from coring. Only a few shallow lakes up to 1 km beneath ice have been surveyed (e.g. Lake Whillams in West Antarctica and Grímsvötn Lake in Iceland). The exclusively microbial trophic web is truncated, with no photoautotrophs and apparently few multi-cellular predators, but taxonomic diversity is high across bacteria and archaea, with some eukaryotes also represented. Chemosynthesis form the base of the trophic web, chemolithoautotrophic species using reduced N, Fe and S and methane in energy-generating metabolic pathways. The abundance of micro-organisms is comparable to that in groundwater (SF1.2) (10<sup>4</sup> – 10<sup>5</sup> cells.ml-1), with diverse morphotypes represented including long and short filaments, thin and thick rods, spirals, vibrio, cocci and diplococci. Subglacial lakes share several biotic traits with extremophiles within ice (T6.1), subterranean waters (SF1.1, SF1.2) and deep oceans (e.g. M2.3, M2.4, M3.3), including very low productivity, slow growth rates, large cell sizes and aphotic energy synthesis. Although microbes of the few surveyed subglacial lakes, and from accreted ice which has refrozen from lake water, have DNA profiles similar to those of other contemporary microbes, the biota in deeper disconnected lake waters and associated lake-floor sediments, could be highly relictual if it evolved in stable isolation over millions of years under extreme selection pressures. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Subglacial lakes vary in size from less than 1 km2 to ~10,000 km2, and most are 10-20 m deep, but Lake Vostok (Antarctica) is at least 1,000 m deep. The environment is characterised by high isostatic pressure (up to ~350 atmospheres), constant cold temperatures marginally below 0°C, low-nutrient levels, and an absence of sunlight. Oxygen concentrations can be high due to equilibration with gas hydrates from the melting ice sheet base ice, but declines with depth in amictic lakes due to limited mixing, depending on convection gradients generated by cold meltwater from the ice ceiling and geothermal heating from below. Chemical weathering of basal debris is the main source of nutrients supplemented by ice melt.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Some ~400 subglacial lakes in Antarctica, ~60 in Greenland and a few in Iceland and Canada have been identified from radar remote sensing and modelling. 

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences of subglacial lakes were mapped as 0.5 degree cells containing the point records of Wright and Siegert (2012), Bowler et al. (2019), Marteinsson et al. (2013) and Livingstone et al. (2016). Unmapped lakes are likely to occur within areas with permanent snow and ice cover and were mapped as minor occurrences based on permanent snow and ice from Dinerstein et al. (2017) and Tuanmu et al. (2014).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Bowling JS, Livingstone SJ, Sole AJ, Chu W (2019) Distribution and dynamics of Greenland subglacial Lakes. Nature Communications 10:2810. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10821-w
* Mikucki JA et al. (2016) Subglacial Lake Whillans microbial biogeochemistry: a synthesis of current knowledge. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 374: 20140290.
* Siegert MJ, Ellis-Evans JC, Tranter M, Mayer C, Petit JR, Salamatink A, Priscu JC (2001) Physical, chemical and biological processes in Lake Vostok and other Antarctic subglacial lakes. Nature 414: 603-609.
### Map References
* Bowling JS, Livingstone SJ, Sole AJ, Chu W (2019) Distribution and dynamics of Greenland subglacial Lakes. Nature Communications 10:2810. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10821-w
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Livingstone, S., Utting, D., Ruffell, A. et al. Discovery of relict subglacial lakes and their geometry and mechanism of drainage. Nat Commun 7, ncomms11767 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11767
* Thór Marteinsson, V., Rúnarsson, Á., Stefánsson, A. et al. Microbial communities in the subglacial waters of the Vatnajökull ice cap, Iceland. ISME J 7, 427–437 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2012.97
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
* Wright, A., & Siegert, M. (2012). *A fourth inventory of Antarctic subglacial lakes*. **Antarctic Science**, 24(6), 659-664. doi:[10.1017/S095410201200048X](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S095410201200048X)
