---
name: F2.2 Small permanent freshwater lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.2
biomecode: F2
contributors: RT Kingsford, B Robson, R MacNally, L Jackson, F Essl, M Kelly-Quinn, K Irvine, S Bertilsson, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Small permanent freshwater lakes, pools or ponds are lentic environments with relatively high perimeter-to-surface area and surface-area-to-volume ratios. Most are <1 km2 in area, but this functional group includes lakes of transitional sizes up to 100 km2, while the largest lakes (>100 km2) are classified in F2.1. Niche diversity increases with lake size. Although less diverse than larger lakes, these lakes may support phytoplankton, zooplankton, shallow-water macrophytes, invertebrates, sedentary and migratory fish, reptiles, waterbirds, and mammals. Primary productivity, dominated by cyanobacteria, algae, and macrophytes, arises from allochthonous and autochthonous energy sources, which vary with lake and catchment features, climate, and hydrological connectivity. Productivity can be highly seasonal, depending on climate, light, and nutrients. Permanent water and connectivity are critical to obligate freshwater biota, such as fish, invertebrates, and aquatic macrophytes. Trophic structure and complexity depend on lake size, depth, location, and connectivity. Littoral zones and benthic pathways are integral to overall production and trophic interactions. Shallow lakes tend to be more productive (by volume and area) than deep lakes because light penetrates to the bottom, establishing competition between benthic macrophytes and phytoplankton, more complex trophic networks and stronger top-down regulation leading to alternative stable states and possible regime shifts between them. Clear lakes in macrophyte-dominated states support higher biodiversity than phytoplankton-dominated eutrophic lakes. Deep lakes are more dependent on planktonic primary production, which supports zooplankton, benthic microbial and invertebrate detritivores. Herbivorous fish and zooplankton regulate the main primary producers (biofilms and phytoplankton). The main predators are fish, macroinvertebrates, amphibians and birds, many of which have specialised feeding traits tied to different habitat niches (e.g. benthic or pelagic), but there are few filter-feeders. In many regions, shallow lakes provide critical breeding habitat for waterbirds, amphibians, and reptiles, while visiting mammals transfer nutrients, organic matter, and biota.

# Ecological Drivers

These lakes may be hydrologically isolated, groundwater-dependent or connected to rivers as terminal or flow-through systems. Nutrients depend on catchment size and substrates. Some lakes (e.g. on leached coastal sandplains or peaty landscapes) have dystrophic waters. The seasonality and amount of inflow, size, depth (mixing regime and light penetration), pH, nutrients, salinity, and tanins shape lake ecology and biota. Seasonal cycles of temperature, inflow and wind (which drives vertical mixing) may generate monomictic or dimictic temperature stratification regimes in deeper lakes, while shallow lakes are polymicitic, sometimes with short periods of multiple stratification. Seasonal factors such as light, increases in temperature, and flows into lakes can induce breeding and recruitment.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mainly in humid temperate and tropical regions, rarely semi-arid or arid zones.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al., 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km2), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager et al., 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al., 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Jeppesen E., Peder Jensen J., Søndergaard M., Lauridsen T., Junge Pedersen L., Jensen L. (1997) Top-down control in freshwater lakes: the role of nutrient state, submerged macrophytes and water depth. In: Kufel L., Prejs A., Rybak J.I. (eds) Shallow Lakes ’95. Developments in Hydrobiology, vol 119. Springer, Dordrecht
* Schindler DE, Scheuerell MD (2002) Habitat coupling in lake ecosystems. Oikos 98:177-189.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
