---
name: F2.3 Seasonal freshwater lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.3
biomecode: F2
contributors: RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, MC Rains, B Robson, K Irvine, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:29:20
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These small (mostly <5 km<sup>2</sup> in area) and shallow (<2 m deep) seasonal freshwater lakes, vernal pools, turloughs, or gnammas (panholes, rock pools), are characterised by a seasonal aquatic biota. Local endemism may be high in lakes where hydrological isolation promotes biotic insularity, which occurs in some Mediterranean climate regions. Autochthonous energy sources are supplemented by limited allochthonous inputs from small catchments and groundwater. Seasonal variation in biota and productivity outweighs inter-annual variation, unlike in ephemeral lakes (F2.5 and F2.7). Filling induces microbial activity, the germination of seeds and algal spores, hatching and emergence of invertebrates, and growth and reproduction by specialists and opportunistic colonists. Wind-induced mixing oxygenates the water, but eutrophic or unmixed waters may become anoxic and dominated by air-breathers as peak productivity and biomass fuel high biological oxygen demand. Anoxia may be abated diurnally by photosynthetic activity. Resident biota persists through seasonal drying on lake margins or in sediments as desiccation-resistant dormant or quiescent life stages, e.g. crayfish may retreat to burrows that extend to the water table, turtles may aestivate in sediments or fringing vegetation, amphibious perennial plants may persist on lake margins or in seedbanks. Trophic networks and niche diversity are driven by bottom-up processes, especially submerged and emergent macrophytes, and depend on productivity and lake size. Cyanobacteria, algae, and macrophytes are the major primary producers, while annual grasses may colonise dry lake beds. The most diverse lakes exhibit zonation and support phytoplankton, zooplankton, macrophytes, macroinvertebrate consumers, and seasonally resident amphibians (especially juvenile aquatic phases), waterbirds, and mammals. Rock pools have simple trophic structure, based primarily on epilithic algae or macrophytes, and invertebrates, but no fish. Invertebrates and amphibians may reach high diversity and abundance in the absence of fish.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Annual filling and drying are driven by seasonal rainfall, surface flows, groundwater fluctuation and seasonally high evapotranspiration. These lakes are polymicitc, mixing continuously when filled. Impermeable substrates (e.g. clay or bedrock) impede infiltration in some lakes; in others groundwater percolates up through sand, peat or fissures in karstic limestone (turloughs). Small catchments, low-relief terrain, high area-to-volume ratios, and hydrological isolation promote seasonal fluctuation. Most lakes are hydrologically isolated, but some become connected seasonally by sheet flows or drainage lines. These hydrogeomorphic features also limit nutrient supply, in turn limiting pH buffering. High rates of organic decomposition, denitrification, and sediment retention are driven by water fluctuations. High alkalinity reflects high anaerobic respiration. Groundwater flows may ameliorate hydrological isolation. Seasonal filling and drying induce spatio-temporal variability in temperature, depth, pH, dissolved oxygen, salinity, and nutrients, resulting in zonation within lakes and high variability among them.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Mainly subhumid temperate and wet-dry tropical regions in monsoonal and Mediterranean-type climates but usually not semi-arid or arid regions.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km2), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager et al. 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al. 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Keeley JE, Zedler PH (1998) Characterization and global distribution of vernal pools. In: Ecology, conservation and management of vernal pool ecosystems (Eds ET Bauder et al.). California Native Plant Society, Sacramento.
* Rains MC, Fogg GE, Harter T, Dahlgren RA, Williamson RJ (2006). The role of perched aquifers in hydrological connectivity and biogeochemical processes in vernal pool landscapes, Central Valley, California. Hydrological Processes 20: 1157-1175.
* Pettit N, Jardine T , Hamilton S , Sinnamon V, Valdez D, Davies P, Douglas M, Bunn S (2012) Seasonal changes in water quality and macrophytes and the impact of cattle on tropical floodplain waterholes. Marine and Freshwater Research 63, 788-800
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
