---
name: F2.4 Freeze-thaw freshwater lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.4
biomecode: F2
contributors: RT Kingsford, S Bertilsson, LJ Jackson, B Robson, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:28:32
---
# Ecological Traits
 
The majority of the surface of these lakes is frozen for at least a month in most years. Their varied origins (tectonic, riverine, fluvioglacial), size and depth affect composition and function. Allochthonous and autochthonous energy sources vary with lake and catchment features. Productivity is highly seasonal, sustained in winter largely by the metabolism of microbial photoautotrophs, chemautotrophs and zooplankton that remain active under low light, nutrients, and temperatures. Spring thaw initiates a seasonal succession, increasing productivity and re-establishing complex trophic networks, depending on lake area, depth, connectivity, and nutrient availability. Diatoms are usually first to become photosynthetically active, followed by small and motile zooplankton, which respond to increased food availability, and cyanobacteria later in summer when grazing pressure is high. Large lakes with high habitat complexity (e.g. Lake Baikal) support phytoplankton, zooplankton, macrophytes (in shallow waters), invertebrate consumers, migratory fish (in connected lakes), waterbirds, and mammals. Their upper trophic levels are more abundant, diverse, and endemic than in smaller lakes. Herbivorous fish and zooplankton are significant top-down regulators of the main primary producers (i.e. biofilms and phytoplankton). These, in turn, are regulated by predatory fish, which may be limited by prey availability and competition. The biota is spatially structured by seasonally dynamic gradients in cold stratification, light, nutrient levels, and turbulence. Traits such as resting stages, dormancy, freeze-cued spore production in phytoplankton, and the ability of fish to access low oxygen exchange enable persistence through cold winters under the ice and through seasonal patterns of nutrient availability.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Seasonal freeze-thaw cycles typically generate dimictic temperature stratification regimes (i.e. mixing twice per year), where cold water lies above warm water in winter and vice versa in summer. Shallow lakes may mix continuously (polymicitic) during the summer and may freeze completely during winter. Mixing occurs in autumn and spring. Freezing reduces light penetration and turbulence, subduing summer depth gradients in temperature, oxygen, and nutrients. Ice also limits atmospheric inputs, including gas exchange. Very low temperatures reduce the growth rates, diversity, and abundance of fish. Many lakes are stream sources. Lake sizes vary from <1 ha to more than 30,000 km2, profoundly affecting niche diversity and trophic complexity. Freezing varies with the area and depth of lakes. Thawing is often accompanied by flooding in spring, ameliorating light and temperature gradients, and increasing mixing. Dark-water inflows from peatlands in catchments influence water chemistry, light penetration, and productivity.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Predominantly across the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere and high altitudes of South America, New Zealand and Tasmania.

{% capture map_det %}
Location of small and large natural lakes was taken from the HydroLAKES database (types 1 an 3 in Messager et al. 2016). We included all lakes with minimum temperature below 0°C (Linke et al. 2019). Occurrences were aggregated to ten minute spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Adrian R, Walz N, Hintze, T, Hoeg S, Rusche R (1999) Effects of ice duration on plankton succession during spring in a shallow polymictic lake. Freshwater Biology 41: 621-634.
* Bertilsson S, Burgin A, Carey CC, Fey SB, Grossart H, Grubisic LM, Jones ID, Kirillin G, Lennon JT, Shade A, Smyth RL (2013) The under-ice microbiome of seasonally frozen lakes. Limnology Oceanography 58: 1998–2012.
### Map References
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
