---
name: F2.5 Ephemeral freshwater lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.5
biomecode: F2
contributors: DJ Roux, R Mac Nally, RT Kingsford, JT Hollibaugh, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Shallow ephemeral freshwater bodies are also known as depressions, playas, clay pans, or pans. Long periods of low productivity during dry phases are punctuated by episodes of high production after filling. Trophic structure is relatively simple with mostly benthic, filamentous, and planktonic algae, detritivorous and predatory zooplankton (e.g. rotifers and Daphnia), crustaceans, insects, and in some lakes, molluscs. The often high invertebrate biomass provides food for amphibians and itinerant waterbirds. Terrestrial mammals use the lakes to drink and bathe and may transfer nutrients, organic matter, and ’hitch-hiking’ biota. Diversity may be high in boom phases but there are only a few local endemics (e.g. narrow-ranged charophytes). Specialised and opportunistic biota exploit boom-bust resource availability through life-cycle traits that confer tolerance to desiccation (e.g. desiccation-resistant eggs in crustaceans) and/or enable rapid hatching, development, breeding, and recruitment when water arrives. Much of the biota (e.g. opportunistic insects) have widely dispersing adult phases enabling rapid colonisation and re-colonisation. Filling events initiate succession with spikes of primary production, allowing short temporal windows for consumers to grow and reproduce, and for itinerant predators to aggregate. Drying initiates senescence, dispersal, and dormancy until the next filling event.

# Ecological Drivers

Arid climates have highly variable hydrology. Episodic inundation after rain is relatively short (days to months) due to high evaporation rates and infiltration. Drainage systems are closed or nearly so, with channels or sheet inflow from flat, sparsely vegetated catchments. Inflows bring allochthonous organic matter and nutrients and are typically turbid with fine particles. Clay-textured lake bottoms hold water by limiting percolation but may include sand particles. Bottom sediments release nutrients rapidly after filling. Lakes are shallow, flat-bottomed and polymicitic when filled with small volumes, so light and oxygen are generally not limiting. Persistent turbidity may limit light but oxygen production by macrophytes and flocculation (i.e. clumping) from increasing salinity during drying reduce turbidity over time. Shallow depth promotes high daytime water temperatures (when filling in summer) and high diurnal temperature variability.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Semi-arid and arid regions at mid-latitudes of the Americas, Africa, Asia, and Australia.

{% capture map_det %}
Location of natural ephemeral freshwater lakes was taken from global lake databases (Lehner and Döll, 2004; types 1 an 3 from Messager et al., 2016), excluding those from endorheic basins cf. F2.7 (Linke et al., 2019), and intersected with estimates of ephemeral surface water (classes 9 and 10 from Pekel et al., 2016). Occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Hancock MA, Timms BV (2002) Ecology of four turbid clay pans during a filling-drying cycle in the Paroo, semi-arid Australia. Hydrobiologia 479: 95-107.
* Meintjes S (1996)
* Williams WD (2000) Biodiversity in temporary wetlands of dryland regions. Internationale Vereinigung für theoretische und angewandte Limnologie: Verhandlungen 27: 141-144.
### Map References
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Lehner, B. and Döll, P. (2004): *Development and validation of a global database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands*. **Journal of Hydrology** 296/1-4: 1-22. [Data-set](https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/global-lakes-and-wetlands-database)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
