---
name: F2.6 Permanent salt and soda lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.6
biomecode: F2
contributors: RT Kingsford, JT Hollibaugh, B Robson, R Harper, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Permanent salt lakes have waters with periodically or permanently high sodium chloride concentrations. This group includes lakes with high concentrations of other ions (e.g. carbonate in soda lakes). Unlike in hypersaline lakes, productivity is not suppressed and autotrophs may be abundant, including phytoplankton, cyanobacteria, green algae, and submerged and emergent macrophytes. These, supplemented by allochthonous energy and C inputs from lake catchments, support relatively simple trophic networks characterised by few species in high abundance and some regional endemism. The high biomass of archaeal and bacterial decomposers and phytoplankton in turn supports abundant consumers including brine shrimps, copepods, insects and other invertebrates, fish, and waterbirds (e.g. flamingos). Predators and herbivores that become dominant at low salinity exert top-down control on algae and low-order consumers. Species niches are structured by spatial and temporal salinity gradients. Species in the most saline conditions tend to have broader ranges of salinity tolerance. Increasing salinity generally reduces diversity and the importance of top-down trophic regulation but not necessarily the abundance of organisms, except at hypersaline levels. Many organisms tolerate high salinity through osmotic regulation (at a high metabolic cost), limiting productivity and competitive ability.

# Ecological Drivers

Permanent salt lakes tend to be large and restricted to semi-arid climates with high evaporation but with reliable inflow sources (e.g. snowmelt). They may be thousands of hectares in size and several metres deep. A few are much larger and deeper (e.g. Caspian Sea), while some volcanic lakes are small and deep. Endorheic drainage promotes salt accumulation, but lake volume and reliable water inflows are critical to buffering salinity below extreme levels. Salinity varies temporally from 0.3% to rarely more than 10% depending on lake size, temperature, and the balance between freshwater inflows, precipitation, and evaporation. Inflow is critical to ecosystem dynamics, partly by driving the indirect effects of salinity on trophic or engineering processes. Within lakes, salt concentrations may be vertically stratified (i.e. meromictic) due to the higher density of saltwater compared to freshwater inflow and slow mixing. Dissolved oxygen is inversely related to salinity, hence anoxia is common at depth in meromictic lakes. Ionic composition and concentration varies greatly among lakes due to differences in substrate and inflow, with carbonate, sulphate, sulphide, ammonia, and/or phosphorus sometimes reaching high levels, and pH varying from 3 to 11.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mostly in semi-arid regions of Africa, southern Australia, Eurasia, and western parts of North and South America.

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences were compiled from a list of known salt lakes in Wurtsbaugh et al., (2017) and augmented by authors, then matched with names in the HydroLAKES database to identify natural lakes (types 1 and 3 of Messager et al., 2016). Minor occurrences were mapped within arid and semi-arid parts of selected freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al., 2008) by clipping ecoregions to exclude areas with mean annual rainfall >250mm (Harris et al., 2014a). Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al., 2008) were selected if they contained occurrences of permanent salt or soda lakes if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Boros E, Kolpakova M (2018)A review of the defining chemical properties of soda lakes and pans: An assessment on a large geographic scale of Eurasian inland saline surface waters. PLoSONE 13(8):e0202205
* Humayoun SB, Bano N, Hollibaugh JT (2003) Depth distribution of microbial diversity in Mono Lake, a meromictic soda lake in California. Applied and environmental microbiology 69:1030-1042.
* Williams WD (1998) Salinity as a determinant of the structure of biological communities in salt lakes. Hydrobiologia 381:191-201.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Harris, I., Jones, P.D., Osborn, T.J. and Lister, D.H. (2014), *Updated high-resolution grids of monthly climatic observations - the CRU TS3.10 Dataset*. **International Journal of Climatology** 34, 623-642 [doi:10.1002/joc.3711](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/joc.3711) [Revised appendix](https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/Revised_Appendix_3_CLD.pdf)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Wurtsbaugh, W., Miller, C., Null, S. et al. *Decline of the world's saline lakes*. **Nature Geoscience** 10, 816–821 (2017). [10.1038/ngeo3052](https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo3052)
