---
name: F2.7 Ephemeral salt lakes
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.7
biomecode: F2
contributors: RT Kingsford, JT Hollibaugh, K Irvine, R Harper, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Ephemeral salt lakes or playas have relatively short-lived wet phases and long dry periods of years to decades. During filling phases, inflow dilutes salinity to moderate levels, and allochthonous energy and carbon inputs from lake catchments supplement autochthonous energy produced by abundant phytoplankton, cyanobacteria, diatoms, green algae, submerged and emergent macrophytes, and fringing halophytes. In drying phases, increasing salinity generally reduces diversity and top-down trophic regulation, but not necessarily the abundance of organisms – except at hypersaline levels, which suppress productivity. Trophic networks are simple and characterised by few species that are often highly abundant during wet phases. The high biomass of archaeal and bacterial decomposers and phytoplankton in turn support abundant consumers, including crustaceans (e.g. brine shrimps and copepods), insects and other invertebrates, fish, and specialist waterbirds (e.g. banded stilts, flamingos). Predators and herbivores that dominate at low salinity levels exert top-down control on algae and low-order consumers. Species niches are strongly structured by spatial and temporal salinity gradients and endorheic drainage promotes regional endemism. Species that persist in the most saline conditions tend to have broad salinity tolerance. Many organisms regulate salinity osmotically at a high metabolic cost, limiting productivity and competitive ability. Many specialised opportunists are able to exploit boom-bust resource cycles through life-cycle traits that promote persistence during dry periods (e.g. desiccation-resistant eggs in crustaceans and/or rapid hatching, development, breeding, and recruitment). Much of the biota (e.g. insects and birds) have widely dispersed adult phases enabling rapid colonisation. Filling events drive specialised succession, with short windows of opportunity to grow and reproduce reset by drying until the next filling event.

# Ecological Drivers

Ephemeral salt lakes are up to 10,000 km2 in area and usually less than a few metres deep. They may be weakly vertically stratified (i.e. meromictic) due to the slow mixing of freshwater inflow with higher density saltwater. Endorheic drainage promotes salt accumulation. Salinity varies temporally from 0.3% to over 26% depending on lake size, depth temperature, and the balance between freshwater inflows, precipitation, and evaporation. Inflow is critical to ecosystem dynamics, mediates wet-dry phases, and drives the indirect effects of salinity on trophic and ecosystem processes. Dissolved oxygen is inversely related to salinity, hence anoxia is common in hypersaline lake states. Ionic composition varies, with carbonate, sulphate, sulphide, ammonia, and/or phosphorus sometimes at high levels, and pH varying from 3 to 11.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mostly in arid and semi-arid Africa, Eurasia, Australia, and North and South America.

{% capture map_det %}
Location of ephemeral lakes was taken from global lake databases (Lehner and Döll, 2004; types 1 and 3 from Messager et al., 2016), intersected with estimates of ephemeral surface water (classes 9 and 10 from Pekel et al., 2016) and the distribution of arid and semi-arid, endorheic basins (Linke et al., 2019). Occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution. Occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* McCulloch G., Aebischer A,Irvine, K (2003). Satellite tracking of flamingos in southern Africa: the importance of small wetlands for management and conservation. Oryx, 37, 480–483
* Seaman MT, Ashton PJ, Williams WD (1991) Inland salt waters of southern Africa. Hydrobiologia 210: 75-91.
* Williams WD (1998) Salinity as a determinant of the structure of biological communities in salt lakes. Hydrobiologia 381:191-201.
### Map References
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Lehner, B. and Döll, P. (2004): *Development and validation of a global database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands*. **Journal of Hydrology** 296/1-4: 1-22. [Data-set](https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/global-lakes-and-wetlands-database)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M. (2019). Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution. Scientific Data 6: 283. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
