---
name: F2.8 Artesian springs and oases
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.8
biomecode: F2
contributors: DJ Roux, RT Kingsford, AH Arthington, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These groundwater-dependent systems are fed by artesian waters that discharge to the surface. They are.surrounded by dry landscapes and receive little surface inflow, being predominantly disconnected from surface-stream networks. Insularity from the broader landscape results in high levels of endemism in sedentary aquatic biota, which are likely descendants of relic species from a wetter past. Springs may be spatially clustered due to their association with geological features such as faults or outcropping aquifers. Even springs in close proximity may have distinct physical and biological differences. Some springs have outflow streams, which may support different assemblages of plants and invertebrates to those in the spring orifice. Artesian springs and oases tend to have simple trophic structures. Autotrophs include aquatic algae and floating vascular plants, with emergent amphibious plants in shallow waters. Terrestrial plants around the perimeter contribute subsidies of organic matter and nutrients through litter fall. Consumers and predators include crustaceans, molluscs, arachnids, insects, and small-bodied fish. Most biota are poorly dispersed and have continuous life cycles and other traits specialised for persistence in hydrologically stable, warm, or hot mineral-rich water. Springs and oases are reliable watering points for wide-ranging birds and mammals, which function as mobile links for resources and promote the dispersal of other biota between isolated wetlands in the dryland matrix.

# Ecological Drivers

Flow of artesian water to the surface is critical to these wetlands, which receive little input from precipitation or runoff. Hydrological variability is low compared to other wetland types, but hydrological connections with deep regional aquifers, basin-fill sediments and local watershed recharge drive lagged flow dynamics. Flows vary over geological timeframes, with evidence of cyclic growth, waning, and extinction. Discharge waters tend to have elevated temperatures, are polymicitic and enriched in minerals that reflect their geological origins. The precipitation of dissolved minerals (e.g. carbonates) and deposition by wind and water form characteristic cones or mounds known as “mound springs”. Perennial flows and hydrological isolation from other spatially and temporally restricted surface waters make these wetlands important ecological refuges in arid landscapes.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Scattered throughout arid regions in southern Africa, the Sahara, the Middle East, central Eurasia, southwest of North America, and Australia’s Great Artesian Basin.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al., 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km2), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager et al., 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al., 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Patten DT, Rouse L, Stromberg JC (2008) Isolated spring wetlands in the Great Basin and Mojave Deserts, USA: potential response of vegetation to groundwater withdrawal. Environmental Management 41: 398-413.
* Rossini R, Fensham R, Stewart-Koster B, Gotch T, Kennard M (2018) Biographical patterns of endemic diversity and its conservation in Australia’s artesian desert springs. Diversity and Distributions 24, 1-18.
* Worthington Wilmer J, Elkin C, Wilcox C, Murray L, Niejalke D, Possingham H (2008) The influence of multiple dispersal mechanisms and landscape structure on population clustering and connectivity in fragmented artesian spring snail populations. Molecular Ecology 17: 3733-3751.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
