---
name: F2.9 Geothermal pools and wetlands
biome: F2. Lakes biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F2.9
biomecode: F2
contributors: DA Keith, A Channing, PS Giler
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These hot springs, geysers, mud pots and associated wetlands result from interactions of deeply circulating groundwater with magma and hot rocks that produce chemically precipitated substrates. They support a specialised but low-diversity biota structured by extreme thermal and geochemical gradients. Energy is almost entirely autochthonous, productivity is low, and trophic networks are very simple. Primary producers include chemoautotrophic bacteria and archaea, as well as photoautotrophic cyanobacteria, diatoms, algae, and macrophytes. Thermophilic and metallophilic microbes dominate the most extreme environments in vent pools, while mat-forming green algae and animal-protists occur in warm acidic waters. Thermophilic blue-green algae reach optimum growth above 45°C. Diatoms occur in less acidic warm waters. Aquatic macrophytes occur on sinter aprons and wetlands with temperatures below 35°C. Herbivores are scarce, allowing thick algal mats to develop. These are inhabited by invertebrate detritivores, notably dipterans and coleopterans, which may tolerate temperatures up to 55°C. Molluscs and crustaceans occupy less extreme microhabitats (notably in hard water hot springs), as do vertebrates such as amphibians, fish, snakes and visiting birds. Microinvertebrates such as rotifers and ostracods are common. Invertebrates, snakes and fish exhibit some endemism due to habitat insularity. Specialised physiological traits enabling metabolic function in extreme temperatures include thermophilic proteins with short amino-acid lengths, chaperone molecules that assist protein folding, branched chain fatty acids and polyamines for membrane stabilisation, DNA repair systems, and upregulated glycolysis providing energy to regulate heat stress. Three mechanisms enable metabolic function in extremely acidic (pH<3) geothermal waters: proton efflux via active transport pumps that counter proton influx, decreased permeability of cell membranes to suppress proton entry into the cytoplasm, and strong protein and DNA repair systems. Similar mechanisms enable metabolic function in waters with high concentrations of metal toxins. A succession of animal and plant communities occur with distance from the spring source as temperatures cool and minerals precipitate.

# Ecological Drivers

Continual flows of geothermal groundwater sustain these polymicitic water bodies. Permanent surface waters may be clear or highly turbid with suspended solids as in ‘mud volcanoes’. Water temperatures vary from hot (>44°C) to extreme (>80°C) on local gradients (e.g. vent pools, geysers, mounds, sinter aprons, terraces, and outflow streams). The pH is either extremely acid (2–4) or neutral-alkaline (7–11). Mineral salts are concentrated, but composition varies greatly among sites with properties of the underlying bedrock. Dissolved and precipitated minerals include very high concentrations of silicon, calcium or iron, but also arsenic, antimony, copper, zinc, cadmium, lead, polonium or mercury, usually as oxides, sulphides, or sulphates, but nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus may be scarce.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Tectonically or volcanically active areas from tropical to subpolar latitudes. Notable examples in Yellowstone (USA), Iceland, New Zealand, Atacama (Chile), Japan and east Africa.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al., 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km2), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager et al., 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel et al., 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Channing A (2018) A review of active hot-spring analogues of Rhynie: environments, habitats and ecosystems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 373: 20160490.
* Power JF, Carere CR, Lee CK, Wakerley GLJ, Evans DW, Button M, White D, Climo MD, Hinze AM, Morgan XC, McDonald IR, Cary SC, Stott MB (2018) *Microbial biogeography of 925 geothermal springs in New Zealand*. **Nature Communications** 9: 2876. DOI: [10.1038/s41467-018-05020-y](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05020-y)
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Jean-Francois Pekel, Andrew Cottam, Noel Gorelick, Alan S. Belward, High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature 540, 418-422 (2016). (doi:10.1038/nature20584)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
