---
name: F3.1 Large reservoirs
biome: F3. Artificial wetlands biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F3.1
biomecode: F3
contributors: DJ Roux, RT Kingsford, CA Reidy Liermann, B Robson, M Kelly-Quinn, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Rivers are impounded by the construction of dam walls, creating large freshwater reservoirs, mostly 15–250 m deep. Primary productivity is low to moderate and restricted to the euphotic zone (limnetic and littoral zones), varying with turbidity and associated light penetration, nutrient availability, and water temperature. Trophic networks are simple with low species diversity and endemism. Shallow littoral zones have the highest species diversity including benthic algae, macroinvertebrates, fish, waterbirds, aquatic reptiles, aquatic macrophytes, and terrestrial or amphibious vertebrates. Phytoplankton and zooplankton occur through the littoral and limnetic zones. The profundal zone lacks primary producers and, if oxygenated, is dominated by benthic detritivores and microbial decomposers. Fish communities inhabit the limnetic and littoral zones and may be dominated by managed species and opportunists. Reservoirs may undergo eutrophic succession due to inflow from catchments with sustained fertiliser application or other nutrient inputs.

# Ecological Drivers

Reservoirs receive water from the rivers they impound. Managed release or diversion of water alters natural variability. Large variations in water level produce wide margins that are intermittently inundated or dry, limiting productivity and the number of species able to persist there. Inflow volumes may be regulated. Inflows may contain high concentrations of phosphorus and/or nitrogen (e.g. from sewerage treatment effluents or fertilised farmland), leading to eutrophication. Reservoirs in upper catchments generally receive less nutrients and cooler water (due to altitude) than those located downstream. Geomorphology, substrate, and land use of the river basin influence the amount of inflowing suspended sediment, and hence turbidity, light penetration, and the productivity of planktonic and benthic algae, as well as rates of sediment build-up on the reservoir floor. Depth gradients in light and oxygen, as well as thermal stratification, strongly influence the structure of biotic communities and trophic interactions, as do human introductions of fish, aquatic plants, and other alien species.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Large reservoirs are scattered across all continents with the greatest concentrations in Asia, Europe, and North America. Globally, there are more than 3000 reservoirs with a surface area ≥ 50km2. Spatial data are incomplete for some countiries.

{% capture map_det %}
Polygons of reservoirs were obtained from water bodies in classes 2 and 3 in the HydroLakes database, except for those larger than 100 km2, as these included a number of semi-regulated natural lakes (Messager et al. 2016). Additional point locations were taken from the Global Georeferenced Database of Dams (Mulligan et al. 2020), adding a spatial buffer of 15 arc-minutes to represent uncertainty in their exact location and extent. Major and minor occurrences were not distinguished .
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Clavero M, Hermoso, V (2011) Reservoirs promote the taxonomic homogenization of fish communities within river basins. Biodiversity and Conservation 20, 41-57
* Lehner B, Liermann CR, Revenga C, Vörösmarty C, Fekete B, Crouzet P, Döll P, Endejan M, Frenken K, Magome J, Nilsson C (2011) High‐resolution mapping of the world's reservoirs and dams for sustainable river‐flow management. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 9: 494-502.
### Map References
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Mulligan, M., van Soesbergen, A. and Saenz, L. 2020. GOODD, a global dataset of more than 38,000 georeferenced dams. Scientific Data 7 (31).


