---
name: F3.2 Constructed lacustrine wetlands
biome: F3. Artificial wetlands biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F3.2
biomecode: F3
contributors: JL Nel, RT Kingsford, B Robson, M Kelly-Quinn, LJ Jackson, R Harper, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Shallow, open water bodies have been constructed in diverse landscapes and climates. They may be fringed by amphibious vegetation, or else bedrock or bare soil maintained by earthworks or livestock trampling. Emergents rarely extend throughout the water body, but submerged macrophytes are often present. Productivity ranges from very high in wastewater ponds to low in mining and excavation pits, depending on depth, shape, history and management. Taxonomic and functional diversity range from levels comparable to natural lakes to much less, depending on productivity, complexity of aquatic or fringing vegetation, water quality, management and proximity to other waterbodies or vegetation. Trophic structure includes phytoplankton and microbial detritivores, with planktonic and invertebrate predators dominating limnetic zones. Macrophytes may occur in shallow littoral zones or submerged habitats, and some artificial water bodies include higher trophic levels including macroinvertebrates, amphibians, turtles, fish, and waterbirds. Fish may be introduced by people or arrive by flows connected to source populations, where these exist. Endemism is generally low, but these waterbodies may be important refuges for some species now highly depleted in their natural habitats. Life histories often reflect those found in natural waterbodies nearby, but widely dispersed opportunists dominate where water quality is poor. Intermittent water bodies support biota with drought resistance or avoidance traits, while permanently inundated systems provide habitat for mobile species such as waterbirds.

# Ecological Drivers

Water bodies are constructed for agriculture, mining, stormwater, ornamentation, wastewater, or other uses, or fill depressions left by earthworks, obstructing surface flow or headwater channels. Humans may directly or indirectly regulate inputs of water and chemicals (e.g. fertilisers, flocculants, herbicides), as well as water drawdown. Climate and weather also affect hydrology. Shallow depth and lack of shade may expose open water to rapid solar heating and hence diurnally warm temperatures. Substrates include silt, clay, sand, gravel, cobbles or bedrock, and fine sediments of organic material may build up over time. Nutrient levels are highest in wastewater or with run-off from fertilised agricultural land or urban surfaces. Some water bodies (e.g. mines and industrial wastewaters) have concentrated chemical toxins, extremes of pH or high salinities. Humans may actively introduce and remove the biota of various trophic levels (e.g. bacteria, algae, fish, and macrophytes) for water quality management or human consumption.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Scattered across most regions of the world occupied by humans. Farm dams covered an estimated 77,000km2 globally in 2006.

{% capture map_det %}
Point locations of over 1 million water bodies (area: 0.1 - 1 km2) were obtained from the HydroLakes database (Messager et al. 2016). We mapped a spatial buffer of 10 km around these locations to generalise their exact location and extent. We estimated the intensity of agricultural use using the mapped area fractions of pasture (PAF) and cropland (CAF) from Ramankutty et al. (2008). We classified the intersection of the lakes-buffer with PAF+CAF>0.5 as major occurrence and the intersection of the lakes-buffer with 0.05<(PAF+CAF)<0.5 as minor occurrences. The resulting map should show the main concentrations of  constructed lacustrine wetlands but will underestimate occurrences in non-agricultural areas.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Chester ET, Robson BJ (2013) Anthropogenic refuges for freshwater biodiversity: Their ecological characteristics and management. Biological Conservation 166: 64 – 75.
* Downing, JA, Prairie, YT, Cole, JJ, Duarte, CM, et al. (2006) The global abundance and size distribution of lakes, ponds, and impoundments. Limnology and Oceanography 51: 2388-2397.
* Kloskowski J, Green AJ, Polak M, Bustamante J, Krogulec J (2009) Complementary use of natural and artificial wetlands by waterbirds wintering in Doñana, south‐west Spain. Aquatic Conservation: marine and freshwater ecosystems, 19: 815-826.
### Map References
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O. (2016): *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications**: 13603. doi: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Ramankutty, N., Evan, A.T., Monfreda, C., Foley, J.A. (2008). Farming the planet: 1. Geographic distribution of global agricultural lands in the year 2000. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 22(1), 1-19.
