---
name: F3.3 Rice paddies
biome: F3. Artificial wetlands biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F3.3
biomecode: F3
contributors: RT Kingsford, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-18 14:02:13
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Rice paddies are artificial wetlands with low horizontal and vertical heterogeneity fed by rain or irrigation water diverted from rivers. They are predominantly temporary wetlands, regularly filled and dried, although some are permanently inundated, functioning as simplified marshes. Allochthonous inputs come from water inflow but also include the introduction of rice, other production organisms (e.g. fish and crustaceans), and fertilisers that promote rice growth. Simplified trophic networks are sustained by highly seasonal, deterministic flooding and drying regimes and the agricultural management of harvest crops, weeds, and pests. Cultivated macrophytes dominate primary production, but other autotrophs including archaea, cyanobacteria, phytoplankton, and benthic or epiphytic algae also contribute. During flooded periods, microbial changes produce anoxic soil conditions and emissions by methanogenic archaea. Opportunistic colonists include consumers such as invertebrates, zooplankton, insects, fish, frogs, and waterbirds, as well as other aquatic plants. Often they come from nearby natural wetlands or rivers and may breed within rice paddies. During dry phases, obligate aquatic organisms are confined to wet refugia away from rice paddies. These species possess traits that promote tolerance to low water quality and predator avoidance. Others organisms, including many invertebrates and plants, have rapid life cycles and dormancy traits allowing persistence as eggs or seeds during dry phases.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Engineering of levees and channels enables the retention of standing water a few centimetres above the soil surface and rapid drying at harvest time. This requires reliable water supply either through summer rains in the seasonal tropics or irrigation in warm-temperate or semi-arid climates. The water has high oxygen content and usually warm temperatures. Deterministic water regimes and shallow depths limit niche diversity and have major influences on the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soils, which contain high nutrient levels. Rice paddies are often established on former floodplains but may also be created on terraced hillsides. Other human interventions include cultivation and harvest, aquaculture, and the addition of fertilisers, herbicides, and pesticides.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
More than a million square kilometres, mostly in tropical and subtropical Southeast Asia, with small areas in Africa, Europe, South America, North America, and Australia.

{% capture map_det %}
The distribution of rice paddies was estimated from the percentage of rice cover at a 5 arc minute  resolution based on Monfreda et al. (2008). Cells with > 10% rice cover were designated as major occurrences, and those with 1-10% rice cover were designated as minor occurrences.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Fernando CJH (1993) Rice field ecology and fish culture—an overview.  Hydrobiologia 259: 91-113.
* Liesack W, Schnell S, Revsbech NP (2000) Microbiology of flooded rice paddies. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 24: 625-645.
### Map References
* Monfreda CN, Ramankutty N, Foley JA (2008) Farming the planet: 2. Geographic distribution of crop areas, yields, physiological types, and net primary production in the year 2000. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 22: GB1022. 
