---
name: F3.4 Freshwater aquafarms
biome: F3. Artificial wetlands biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F3.4
biomecode: F3
contributors: RT Kingsford, M Beveridge, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-26 08:19:04
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Freshwater aquaculture systems are mostly permanent water bodies in either purpose-built ponds, tanks, or enclosed cages within artificial reservoirs (F3.1), canals (F3.5), freshwater lakes (F2.1 and F2.2), or lowland rivers (F1.2). These systems are shaped by large allochthonous inputs of energy and nutrients to promote secondary productivity by one or a few target consumer species (mainly fish or crustaceans), which are harvested as adults and restocked as juveniles on a regular basis. Fish are sometimes raised in mixed production systems within rice paddies (F3.3), but aquaculture ponds may also be co-located with rice paddies, which are centrally located and elevated above the level of the ponds. The enclosed structures exclude predators of the target species, while intensive anthropogenic management of hydrology, oxygenation, toxins, competitors, and pathogens maintains a simplified trophic structure and near-optimal survival and growth conditions for the target species. Intensive management and low niche diversity within the enclosures limit the functional diversity of biota within the system. However, biofilms and phytoplankton contribute low levels of primary production, sustaining zooplankton and other herbivores, while microbial and invertebrate detritivores break down particulate organic matter. Most of these organisms are opportunistic colonists, as are insects, fish, frogs, and waterbirds, as well as aquatic macrophytes. Often these disperse from nearby natural wetlands, rivers, and host waterbodies.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Aquafarms are small artificial water bodies with low horizontal and vertical heterogeneity. Water regimes are mostly perennial but may be seasonal (e.g. when integrated with rice production). Engineering of tanks, channels, and cages enables the intensive management of water, nutrients, oxygen levels, toxins, other aspects of water chemistry, as well as the introduction of target species and the exclusion of pest biota. Removal of wastewater and replacement by freshwater from lakes or streams, together with inputs of antibiotics and chemicals (e.g. pesticides and fertilisers) influence the physical, chemical, and biological properties of the water column and substrate. When located within cages in natural water bodies, freshwater aquafarms reflect the hydrological and hydrochemical properties of their host waterbody. Nutrient inputs drive the accumulation of ammonium and nitrite nitrogen, as well as phosphorus and declining oxygen levels, which may lead to eutrophication within aquaculture sites and receiving waters.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Concentrated in Asia but also in parts of northern and western Europe, North and West Africa, South America, North America, and small areas of southeast Australia and New Zealand.

{% capture map_det %}
Freshwater ecoregions (Abell et al. 2008) were identified as containing major or minor occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identifed in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. The selections were check by expert reviewers. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Ottinger M, Clauss K, Kuenzer CJO (2016) Aquaculture: relevance, distribution, impacts and spatial assessments–a review. Ocean & Coastal Management 119: 244-266.
### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*, **BioScience** 58: 403–414. DOI:[10.1641/B580507](https://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
