---
name: F3.5 Canals, ditches and drains
biome: F3. Artificial wetlands biome
realm: Freshwater
code: F3.5
biomecode: F3
contributors: RT Kingsford, B Robson, M Kelly-Quinn, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Canals, ditches and storm water drains are artificial streams with low horizontal and vertical heterogeneity. They function as rivers or streams and may have simplified habitat structure and trophic networks, though some older ditches have fringing vegetation, which contributes to structural complexity. The main primary producers are filamentous algae and macrophytes that thrive on allochthonous subsidies of nutrients. Subsidies of organic carbon from urban or rural landscapes support microbial decomposers and mostly small invertebrate detritivores. While earthen banks and linings may support macrophytes and a rich associated fauna, sealed or otherwise uniform substrates limit the diversity and abundance of benthic biota. Fish and crustacean communities, when present, generally exhibit lower diversity and smaller body sizes compared to natural systems, and are often dominated by introduced or invasive species. Waterbirds, when present, typically include a low diversity and density of herbivorous and piscivorous species. Canals, ditches and drains may provide pathways for dispersal or colonisation of native and invasive biota.

# Ecological Drivers

Engineered levees and channels enable managed water flow for human uses, including water delivery for irrigation or recreation, water removal from poorly drained sites or sealed surfaces (e.g. storm water drains), or routes for navigation. Deterministic water regimes and often shallow depths have major influences on the physical, chemical, and biological properties of the canals, ditches and drains. Flows in some ditches may be very slow, approaching lentic regimes. Flows in storm water drains vary with rain or other inputs. Irrigation, transport, or recreation canals usually have steady perennial flows but may be seasonal for irrigation or intermittent where the water source is small. Turbidity varies but oxygen content is usually high. Substrates and banks vary from earthen material or hard surfaces (e.g. concrete, bricks), affecting suitability for macrophytes and niche diversity. The water may carry high levels of nutrients and pollutants due to inflow and sedimentation from sealed surfaces, sewerage, other waste sources, fertilised cropping, or pasture lands.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Urban landscapes and irrigation areas mostly in temperate and subtropical latitudes. Several hundred thousand kilometres of ditches and canals in Europe.

{% capture map_det %}
We used a global map of irrigation areas for the year 2005 () and a global land use/land cover (LULC) map for the year 2020 (Karra et al. 2021). We resampled and aggregated both maps to a 30 arc-second (ca. 1km) resolution. We used a global map of irrigation for the year 2005 (Siebert et al. 2013) to identify irrigation canals and a global land use/land cover (LULC) map for the year 2020 (Karra et al. 2021) to represent drains and canals in built areas. We found fewer mapping artefacts in the irrigation map compiled by Siebert et al. (2013) than a more recent one prepared by Nagaraj et al. (2021). We resampled and aggregated both maps to a 30 arc-second (ca. 1km) resolution. We mapped major occurrences of canals, ditches and drains where the high percentage of area equipped for irrigation was >20% (Siebert et al. 2013) or the proportion of built area was >5% (Karra et al. 2021). We mapped minor occurrences where irrigation-equipped area was 10-20%) or where there was low cover of built area (1-5%).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Chester ET, Robson BJ (2013) Anthropogenic refuges for freshwater biodiversity: Their ecological characteristics and management. Biological Conservation 166: 64 – 75.
* Nunes AL, Tricarico E, Panov VE, Cardoso AC, Katsanevakis S (2015) Pathways and gateways of freshwater invasions in Europe. Aquatic Invasions 10: 359 - 370. 
* Ricciardi A (2006) Patterns of invasion in the Laurentian Great Lakes in relation to changes in vector activity. Diversity and Distributions 12: 425-433.
* Verdonschot RCM, Keizer‐vlek HE, Verdonschot PFM (2011) Biodiversity value of agricultural drainage ditches: a comparative analysis of the aquatic invertebrate fauna of ditches and small lakes. Aquatic Conservation, 21, 715-727 
### Map References
* Deepak Nagaraj, Eleanor Proust, Alberto Todeschini, Maria Cristina Rulli, Paolo D'Odorico,
A new dataset of global irrigation areas from 2001 to 2015,
Advances in Water Resources,
Volume 152,
2021,
103910,
ISSN 0309-1708,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2021.103910.



* Karra, Kontgis, et al. “Global land use/land cover with Sentinel-2 and deep learning.” IGARSS 2021-2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE, 2021.
