---
name: M1.1 Seagrass meadows
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.1
biomecode: M1
contributors: MJ Bishop, AH Altieri, SN Porter, RJ Orth, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-27 12:15:19
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Seagrass meadows are important sources of organic matter, much of which is retained by seagrass sediments. Seagrasses are the only subtidal marine flowering plants and underpin the high productivity of these systems. Macroalgae and epiphytic algae, also contribute to productivity, supporting both detritus production and autochthonous trophic structures, but compete with seagrasses for light. The complex three-dimensional structure of the seagrass provides shelter and cover to juvenile fish and invertebrates, binds sediments and, at fine scales, dissipates waves and currents. Seagrass ecosystems support infauna living amongst their roots, epifauna, and epiflora living on their shoots and leaves, as well as nekton in the water column. They have a higher abundance and diversity of flora and fauna compared to surrounding unvegetated soft sediments and comparable species richness and abundances to most other marine biogenic habitats. Mutualisms with lucinid molluscs may influence seagrass persistence. Mesograzers (such as amphipods and gastropods) play an important role in controlling epiphytic algal growth on seagrass. Grazing megafauna such as dugongs, manatees and turtles can contribute to patchy seagrass distributions, although they tend to ‘garden’ rather than deplete seagrass.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Typically found in the subtidal zone on soft sedimentary substrates but also occasionally on rocky substrates on low- to moderate-energy coastlines with low turbidity and on intertidal shorelines. Minimum water depth is determined mainly by wave orbital velocity, tidal exposure, and wave energy (i.e. waves disturb seagrass and mobilise sediment), while maximum depth is limited by the vertical diminution of light intensity in the water column. Seagrass growth can be limited by nitrogen and phosphorous availability, but in eutrophic waters, high nutrient availability can lead to the overgrowth of seagrasses by epiphytes and shading by algal blooms, leading to ecosystem collapse. Large storm events and associated wave action lead to seagrass loss.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Widely distributed along the temperate and tropical coastlines of the world.

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative maps of Seagrass meadows were obtained from UNEP-WCMC & Short (2017) based on Green & Short (2003). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* De Boer WF (2007) Seagrass–sediment interactions, positive feedbacks and critical thresholds for occurrence: a review. Hydrobiologia 591: 5-24.
* Orth RJ, Carruthers TJ, Dennison WC, Duarte CM, Fourqurean JW, Heck KL, Hughes AR, Kendrick GA, Kenworthy WJ, Olyarnik S, Short F (2006) *A global crisis for seagrass ecosystems*. **Bioscience** 56: 987-996.
* Larkum WD, Orth RJ, Duarte CM (2006) ‘Seagrasses: biology, ecology and conservation.’  (Springer:  The Netherlands) 
* Van der Heide T, Govers LL, De FouwJ, Olff H, van der Geest M, van Katwijk MM, Piersma T, van de Koppe Jl, Silliman BR, Smolders AJP, van Gils JA (2012) A three-stage symbiosis forms the foundation of seagrass ecosystems. Science 336,1432-1434
### Map References
* Green EP, Short FT (2003) World atlas of seagrasses. UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre. University of California Press, Berkeley. [map data from marine/WCMC_013_014_Seagrass_WMS]
