---
name: M1.2 Kelp forests
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.2
biomecode: M1
contributors: DA Keith, MJ Bishop, SN Porter, EJ Gregr
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-27 12:19:12
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Kelps are benthic brown macroalgae (Order Laminariales) forming canopies that shape the structure and function of these highly productive, diverse ecosystems. These large (up to 30 m in length), fast-growing (up to 0.5 m/day) autotrophs produce abundant consumable biomass, provide vertical habitat structure, promote niche diversity, alter light-depth gradients, dampen water turbulence, and moderate water temperatures. Traits such as large, flexible photosynthetic organs, rapid growth, and strong benthic holdfasts enable kelps to persist on hard substrates in periodically turbulent waters. These kelps may occur as scattered individuals in other ecosystem types, but other macroalgae (e.g. green and coralline) rarely form canopies with similar function and typically form mixed communities with sessile invertebrates (see M1.5 and M1.6). Some kelps are fully submerged, while others form dense canopies on the water surface, which profoundly affect light, turbulence, and temperature in the water column. Interactions among co-occurring kelps are generally positive or neutral, but competition for space and light is an important evolutionary driver. Kelp canopies host a diverse epiflora and epifauna, with some limpets having unique kelp hosts. Assemblages of benthic invertebrate herbivores and detritivores inhabit the forest floor, notably echinoderms and crustaceans. The structure and diversity of life in kelp canopies provide forage for seabirds and mammals, such as gulls and sea otters, while small fish find refuge from predators among the kelp fronds. Herbivores keep epiphytes in check, but kelp sensitivity to herbivores makes the forests prone to complex trophic cascades when declines in top predators release herbivore populations from top-down regulation. This may drastically reduce the abundance of kelps and dependent biota and lead to replacement of the forests by urchin barrens, which persist as an alternative stable state.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Kelp forests are limited by light, nutrients, salinity, temperature, and herbivory. Growth rates are limited by light and proximity to sediment sources. High nutrient requirements are met by terrestrial runoff or upwelling currents, although eutrophication can lead to transition to turf beds. Truncated thermal niches limit the occurrence of kelps in warm waters. Herbivory on holdfasts influences recruitment and can constrain reversals of trophic cascades, even when propagules are abundant. Kelp forests occur on hard substrates in the upper photic zone and rely on wave action and currents for oxygen. Currents also play important roles in dispersing the propagules of kelps and associated organisms. Storms may dislodge kelps, creating gaps that may be maintained by herbivores or rapidly recolonized.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Nearshore rocky reefs to depths of 30 m in temperate and polar waters. Absent from warm tropical waters but present in upwelling zones off Oman, Namibia, Cape Verde, Peru, and the Galapagos.

{% capture map_det %}
Ecoregions with major and minor occurrences of Kelp forests were identified by overlaying a global map of kelp systems (Wernberg and Filbee-Dexter 2019) on marine ecoregions (Spalding et al. 2008), and then clipping to bathymetry with <80m depth (Becker et al. 2009). Clipped ecoregions were assigned to major and minor occurrences based on information in Wernberg and Filbee-Dexter (2019) and author expertise, and proofed by specialist reviewers. Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Bennett S, Wernberg T, Anderson RJ, Bolton JJ et al. (2015) Canopy interactions and physical stress gradients in subtidal communities. Ecology Letters 18: 677–686.
* Steneck RS, Graham MH, Bourque BJ, Corbett D, Erlandson JM, Estes JA, Tegner MJ (2002) *Kelp forest ecosystems - biodiversity, stability, resilience and future*. In: **Environmental Conservation** 29: 436–459.
### Map References
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*, **Marine Geodesy** 32: 355-371. DOI:[10.1080/01490410903297766](https://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI:[10.1641/B570707](https://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
 
* Wernberg T, Filbee-Dexter K (2019) Missing the marine forest for the trees. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 612:209-215. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps12867 
