---
name: M1.3 Photic coral reefs
biome: M1 Marine shelves
realm: Marine
code: M1.3
biomecode: M1
contributors: BA Polidoro / DA Keith
---

# Ecological traits

Coral reefs are biogenic structures that have been built up, and continue to grow over decadal time-scales, as a result of the accumulation of calcium carbonate laid down by hermatypic corals and other organisms. Reef-building corals are colonies of coral polyps in endosymbiotic relationships with photosynthesizing zooxanthellae which assimilate solar energy and nutrients, providing almost all of the metabolic requirements for their host. The corals develop skeletons by extracting dissolved carbonate from seawater and depositing it as aragonite crystals. Corals reproduce asexually, enabling growth of colonial structures. They also reproduce sexually though synchronous spawning related to annual lunar cues. Other sessile organisms including sponges, coralline and other algae add to the diversity and structural complexity of coral reef ecosystems. The complex 3-dimensional structure provides a high diversity of habitat niches and resources that support a highly diverse and locally endemic marine biota, including crustacea, polychaetes, holothurians, echinoderms and other groups, with one-quarter of marine life estimated to depend on reefs for food and/or shelter. Diversity is represented at high and low taxonomic levels. The trophic network is highly complex, with functional diversity represented among primary producers, herbivores, detritvores, suspension feeders, and multiple interacting levels of predators on the benthos and in the water column. Coral diseases also play a critical role in reef dynamics. The vertebrate biota includes fish, snakes, turtles and mammals. The fish fauna is highly diverse, with herbivores and piscivores, displaying a wide diversity of generalist and specialist diets (including wrasses that consume corals), feeding strategies, schooling and solitary behaviours, and reproductive strategies. The largest vertebrates include marine turtles, sharks and seals.

# Key-ecological-drivers

Coral reefs are limited to warm, shallow (rarely >60 m depth), clear, relatively nutrient-poor, open coastal waters, where salinity is 3.0-3.8% and sea temperatures vary between 17-34°C. Cooler temperatures are insufficient to support coral growth, while warmer temperatures cause coral symbiosis to break down (bleaching).  Reef geomorphology varies from atolls, barrier reefs, fringing reefs, lagoon to patch reefs depending upon hydrological and geological conditions. Reef structure and composition varies with depth gradients in light intensity and with turbulence which diminishes with distance from the ocean front. Storm regimes drive cycles of reef destruction and renewal.

# Diagrammatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Tropical and subtropical waters on continental and island shelves, mostly within latitudes of 30° N and S.

{% capture map_det %} Indicative maps of Photic coral reefs were obtained from Institute for Marine Remote Sensing et al. (2011). {% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References

### Text references

* Sheppard C, Davy S, Pilling G, Graham N (2018) The biology of coral reefs. 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

### Map References

* Institute for Marine Remote Sensing, University of South Florida (IMaRS/USF), Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), UNEP-WCMC, The WorldFish Center, and WRI (2011) Global Coral Reefs composite dataset compiled from multiple sources for use in the Reefs at Risk Revisited project incorporating products from the Millennium Coral Reef Mapping Project prepared by IMaRS/USF and IRD.
