---
name: M1.4 Shellfish beds and reefs
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.4
biomecode: M1
contributors: MJ Bishop, SE Swearer, SN Porter, AH Altieri, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:11:17
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These ecosystems are founded on intertidal or subtidal 3-dimensional biogenic structures formed primarily by high densities of oysters and/or mussels, which provide habitat for a moderate diversity of algae, invertebrates, and fishes, few of which are entirely restricted to oyster reefs. Structural profiles may be high (i.e. reefs) or low (i.e. beds). Shellfish reefs are usually situated on sedimentary or rocky substrates, but pen shells form high-density beds of vertically orientated non-gregarious animals in soft sediments. Sessile filter-feeders dominate these strongly heterotrophic but relatively high-productivity systems. Tides bring in food and carry away waste. Energy and matter in waste is processed by a subsystem of deposit-feeding invertebrates. Predators are a small component of the ecosystem biomass, but are nevertheless important in influencing the recruitment, biomass, and diversity of prey organisms (e.g. seastar predation on mussels). Shellfish beds and reefs may influence adjoining estuaries and coastal waters physically and biologically. Physically, they modify patterns of currents, dampen wave energy and remove suspended particulate matter through filter-feeding. Biologically, they remove phytoplankton and produce abundant oyster biomass. They function in biogeochemical cycling as carbon sinks, by increasing denitrification rates, and through N burial/sequestration. Relatively (or entirely) immobile and thin-shelled juveniles are highly susceptible to benthic predators such as crabs, fish, and birds. Recruitment can depend on protective microhabitats provided either by abiogenic or biogenic structures. In intertidal environments, the survival of shellfish can increase with density due to self-shading and moisture retention.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The availability of hard substrate (including shells of live or dead conspecifics) can limit the establishment of reef-forming shellfish, though a few occur on soft substrates. Many shellfish are robust to changes in salinity, closing their valves for days to weeks to avoid adverse conditions, but salinity may indirectly influence survival by determining susceptibility to parasites. High suspended sediment loads caused by high energy tides, rainfall, and run-off events or the erosion of coastal catchments can smother larvae and impede filter-feeding. Most reef- or bed-building shellfish cannot survive prolonged periods of low dissolved oxygen. They are also sensitive to climate change stressors such as temperature (and associated increased risk of desiccation for intertidal species), as well as lowered pH as they are calcifiers. In subtidal environments, the formation of reefs can help elevate animals above anoxic bottom waters.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Estuarine and coastal waters of temperate and tropical regions, extending from subtidal to intertidal zones. Present-day distributions are shaped by historic overharvest, which has removed 85% of reefs globally.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences of shellfish beds and reefs were identified by overlaying a global map of oyster reefs (Beck et al. 2011) on marine ecoregions (Spalding et al. 2008), and then clipping to the extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Dame RF, Patten BC (1981) Analysis of energy flows in an intertidal oyster reef. Marine Ecology Progress Series 5:115-124.
* Beck MW, Brumbaugh RD, Airoldi L, Carranza A,. Coen LD, Crawford C, Defeo O, Edgar GJ, Handcock B, Kay MC, Lenihan HS, Luckenbach M, Toropova CL, Zhang G, Guo X (2011) Oyster reefs at risk and recommendations for conservation, restoration, and management. BioScience 61: 107-116.
### Map References
* Beck MW, Brumbaugh RD, Airoldi L, Carranza A,. Coen LD, Crawford C, Defeo O, Edgar GJ, Handcock B, Kay MC, Lenihan HS, Luckenbach M, Toropova CL, Zhang G, Guo X (2011) Oyster reefs at risk and recommendations for conservation, restoration, and management. BioScience 61: 107-116.
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI:[10.1641/B570707](https://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
 
