---
name: M1.5 Photo-limited marine animal forests
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.5
biomecode: M1
contributors: JS Stark, EJ Gregr, S Rossi, SN Porter, AH Altieri, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These benthic systems are characterised by high densities of megabenthic, sessile heterotrophic suspension feeders or coralline algae that act as habitat engineers and dominate a subordinate autotrophic biota. Unlike coral reefs and shellfish beds, the major sessile animals in these animal forests include sponges, aphotic corals, hydroids, ascidians, hydrocorals, bryozoans, polychaetes, and bivalves (the latter only dominate in M1.4). Various coralline algae may be present in Marine animal forests, but rhodoliths, are never dominant (cf. M1.10). All these organisms engineer complex three-dimensional biogenic structures, sometimes of a single species or distinct phylogenetic groups. The structural complexity generates environmental heterogeneity and habitat, promoting a high diversity of invertebrate epifauna, with microphytobenthos and fish. Endemism may be high. Low light limits primary productivity especially by macroalgae, although microphytobenthos can be important. Energy flow and depth-related processes distinguish these systems from their deepwater aphotic counterparts (M3.7). Nonetheless, these systems are strongly heterotrophic, relying on benthic-pelagic coupling processes. Consequently, these systems are generally of moderate productivity and are often found near shallower, less photo-limited, high-productivity areas. Complex biogeochemical cycles govern nutrient release, particle retention, and carbon fixation. Biodiversity is enhanced by secondary consumers (i.e. deposit-feeding and filter-feeding invertebrates). Predators may influence the biomass and diversity of epifaunal prey organisms. Recruitment processes in benthic animals can be episodic and highly localised and, together with slow growth rates, limit recovery from disturbance.

# Ecological Drivers

Light is generally insufficient to support abundant macroalgae but is above the photosynthetic threshold for coralline algae and cyanobacteria. Light is limited by diffusion through deepwater, surface ice cover, turbidity from river outflow, or tannins in terrestrial runoff. Low to moderate temperatures may further limit productivity. These systems are generally found on hard substrates but can occur on soft substrates. Currents or resuspension and lateral transport processes are important drivers of benthic-pelagic coupling, hence food and nutrient supply. Natural physical disturbances are generally of low severity and frequency, but ice scour can generate successional mosaics where animal forests occur on subpolar shelves.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Tropical to polar coastal waters extending from the shallow subtidal to the ‘twilight’ zone on the shelf. Present-day distributions are likely to have been modified by benthic trawling.

{% capture map_det %}
These are Ecosystem Functional Groups that are widespread through the global extent of the marine shelf biome. Reliable data on their precise distribution are limited. To represent regional uncertainty, their indicative distributions were mapped in as minor occurrences through the full extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Baldwin C, Tornabene L, Robertson D (2018) Below the mesophotic. Scientific Reports 8: 4920.
* Rossi S. (2013) The destruction of the ‘animal forests’ in the oceans: towards an over-simplification of the benthic ecosystems. Ocean & coastal management 84: 77-85.
* Rossi S, Bramanti L, Gori, A, Orejas C (2017) Marine Animal Forests: The ecology of benthic biodiversity Hotspots. Springer, Berlin.
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
