---
name: M1.6 Subtidal rocky reefs
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.6
biomecode: M1
contributors: BA Polidoro, EJ Gregr, SE Swearer, SN Porter, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:12:28
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Submerged rocky reefs host trophically complex communities lacking a dense macroalgal canopy (cf. M1.2). Sessile primary producers and invertebrate filter-feeders assimilate autochthonous and allochthonous energy, respectively. Mobile biota occur in the water column. Reef-associated organisms have diverse dispersal modes. Some disperse widely as adults, some have non-dispersing larvae, others with sessile adult phases develop directly on substrates, or have larval stages or spores dispersed widely by currents or turbulence. Sessile plants include green, brown, and red algae. To reduce dislodgement in storms, macroalgae have holdfasts, while smaller species have low-growing ‘turf’ life forms. Many have traits such as air lacunae or bladders that promote buoyancy. Canopy algae are sparse at the depths or levels of wave exposure occupied by this functional group (cf. kelp forests in M1.2). Algal productivity and abundance decline with depth due to diminution of light and are also kept in check by periodic storms and a diversity of herbivorous fish, molluscs, and echinoderms. The latter two groups and some fish are benthic and consume algae primarily in turf form or at its juvenile stage before stipes develop. Sessile invertebrates occur throughout. Some are high-turbulence specialists (e.g. barnacles, ascidians and anemones), while others become dominant at greater depths as the abundance of faster-growing algae diminishes (e.g. sponges and red algae). Fish include both herbivores and predators. Some are specialist bottom-dwellers, while others are more generalist pelagic species. Herbivores promote diversity through top-down regulation, influencing patch dynamics, trophic cascades and regime shifts involving kelp forests in temperate waters (M1.2). Mosaics of algal dominance, sessile invertebrate dominance, and barrens may shift over time. Topographic variation in the rocky substrate promotes habitat diversity and spatial heterogeneity. This provides refuges from predators but also hiding places for ambush predators including crustaceans and fish.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Minerogenic rocky substrates with variable topography and cobbles are foundational to the habitats of many plants and animals, influencing how they capture resources and avoid predation. A strong depth gradient and substrate structures (e.g. overhangs and caves) limit light availability, as does turbidity. Currents and river outflows are crucial to the delivery of resources, especially nutrients, and also play a key role in biotic dispersal. Animal waste is a key nutrient source sustaining algal productivity in more nutrient-limited systems. Salinity is relatively constant through time (3.5% on average). Turbulence from subsurface wave action promotes substrate instability and maintains high levels of dissolved oxygen. Episodic storms generating more extreme turbulence shift sand and dislodge larger sessile organisms, create gaps that may be maintained by herbivores or rapidly recolonized. 
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Widespread globally on rocky parts of continental and island shelves.

{% capture map_det %}
These are ecosystem functional groups that are widespread through the global extent of the marine shelf biome. Reliable data on their precise distribution are limited. To represent regional uncertainty, their indicative distributions were mapped in as minor occurrences through the full extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Sebens K (1985) The ecology of the rocky subtidal zone. American Scientist 73: 548-557.
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
