---
name: M1.7 Subtidal sandy bottoms
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.7
biomecode: M1
contributors: BA Polidoro, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v1.0, 2020-01-20 12:00:00
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Medium to course-grained, unvegetated, soft minerogenic sediments have moderate levels of biological diversity. The trophic network is dominated by consumers with very few in situ primary producers. Interstitial microalgae and planktonic algae are present, but larger benthic primary producers are limited either by substrate instability or light, which diminishes with depth. Moreover, in shallow waters where light is abundant and soft substrates are relatively stable, this group of systems is replaced by group M1.1, which is dominated by vascular marine plants. In contrast to those autochthonous systems, Subtidal sand beds rely primarily on allochthonous energy supply, with currents generating strong bottom flows and horizontal flux of food. Sandy substrates tend to have less organic matter content and lower microbial diversity and abundance than muddy substrates (M1.8). Soft-sediments in general can be dominated by invertebrate detritivores and suspension-feeders including burrowing polychaetes, crustaceans, echinoderms and molluscs. Suspension feeders tend to be most abundant in high energy environments where waves and currents move sandy sediments, detritus and living organisms. The homogeneity and low structural complexity of the substrate exposes potential prey to high risks of predation, especially from pelagic fish. Consequently, many benthic animals possess specialised traits that enable other means of predator avoidance, such as burrowing, shells or camouflage.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The substrate is soft, minerogenic, low in organic matter, relatively homogeneous, structurally simple and mobile. The pelagic waters are moderate to high-energy environments, with waves and currents promoting substrate instability. Nonetheless, depositional processes dominate over erosion, leading to net sediment accumulation. Fluvial inputs from land and erosion of headlands and sea cliffs contribute the main sources of sediment, nutrients and organic matter, although significant lateral movement is usually driven by longshore currents. Light availability diminishes with depth. Mixing is promoted by waves and currents, ensuring low temporal variability in salinity, which averages 3.5%.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Globally widespread around continental and island shelves.

{% capture map_det %}
These are ecosystem functional groups that are widespread through the global extent of the marine shelf biome. Reliable data on their precise distribution are limited. To represent regional uncertainty, their indicative distributions were mapped in yellow through the full extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main references
* Byers JE, Grabowski JH (2014) Soft-sediment communities. In: Marine community ecology and conservation (Eds. MD Bertness, JF Bruno, BR Silliman, JJ Stachowicz), pp227-249. Sinauer, Sunderland.
* Snelgrove PVR (1999) Getting to the bottom of marine biodiversity: sedimentary habitats. Bioscience 49: 129-138.
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) Geomorphology of the oceans. Marine Geology 352: 4-24.
