---
name: M1.9 Upwelling zones
biome: M1. Marine shelf biome
realm: Marine
code: M1.9
biomecode: M1
contributors: KE Watermeyer, EJ Gregr, RR Rykaczewski, LJ Shannon, IM Suthers, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Upwelled, nutrient-rich water supports very high net autochthonous primary production, usually through diatom blooms. These, in turn, support high biomass of copepods, euphausiids (i.e. krill), pelagic and demersal fish, marine mammals, and birds. Fish biomass tends to be dominated by low- to mid-trophic level species such as sardine, anchovy, and herring. The abundance of these small pelagic fish has been hypothesised to drive ecosystem dynamics through ‘wasp-waist’ trophic control. Small pelagic fish exert top-down control on the copepod and euphausiid plankton groups they feed on and exert bottom-up control on predatory fish, although diel-migrant mesopelagic fish (M2.2) may have important regulatory roles. Abundant species of higher trophic levels include hake and horse mackerel, as well as pinnipeds and seabirds. Highly variable reproductive success of planktivorous fish reflects the fitness of spawners and suitable conditions for concentrating and retaining eggs and larvae inshore prior to maturity.

# Ecological Drivers

Upwelling is a wind-driven process that draws cold, nutrient-rich water towards the surface, displacing warmer, nutrient-depleted waters. The strength of upwelling depends on interactions between local current systems and the Coriolis effect that causes divergence, generally on the eastern boundaries of oceans. The rate of upwelling, the offshore transportation of nutrients, and the degree of stratification in the water column once upwelling has occurred all determine the availability of nutrients to plankton, and hence the size and structure of the community that develops after an event. The main upwelling systems around the world extend to depths of up to 500 m at the shelf break, although primary production is restricted to the epipelagic zone (<200 m). Upwelling zones are characterised by low sea-surface temperatures and high chlorophyll a concentrations, high variability due to large-scale interannual climate cycles (e.g El Niño Southern Oscillation), as well as the pulsed and seasonal nature of the driving winds, and periodic low-oxygen, low pH events due to high biological activity and die-offs.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

The most productive upwelling zones are coastal, notably in four major eastern-boundary current systems (the Canary, Benguela, California, and Humboldt). Weaker upwelling processes occurring in the open ocean are included in M2.1 (e.g. along the intertropical convergence zone).

{% capture map_det %}
Marine ecoregions (Spalding et al., 2008) with major and minor occurrences of Upwelling zones were identified by consulting global and regional reviews (cited in descriptive profile), maps of relevant ecosystems and expertise of authors, proofed by specialist reviewers. The identified ecoregions were then clipped to the extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Cury P, Shannon L, Shin YJ (2003) The functioning of marine ecosystems: a fisheries perspective. In: Responsible fisheries in the marine ecosystem (Eds. M Sinclair, G Valdimarsson), p103–123. FAO, Rome, & CABI Publishing, Wallingford.
* Hutchings L, Pitcher GC, Probyn TA, Bailey GW (1995) The chemical and biological consequences of coastal upwelling. In: Upwelling in the oceans: Modern Processes and Ancient Records (Eds. CP Summerhayes, KC Emeis, MV Angel, RL Smith, B Zeitzschel), pp. 65–81. John Wiley, New York.
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI:[10.1641/B570707](https://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
 
