---
name: M2.1 Epipelagic ocean waters
biome: M2. Pelagic ocean waters biome
realm: Marine
code: M2.1
biomecode: M2
contributors: KE Watermeyer, RR Rykaczewski, IG Priede, TT Sutton, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-27 22:12:06
---
# Ecological Traits
 
The epipelagic or euphotic zone of the open ocean is the uppermost layer that is penetrated by enough light to support photosynthesis. The vast area of the ocean means that autochthonous productivity in the epipelagic layer, largely by diatoms, accounts for around half of all global carbon fixation. This in turn supports a complex trophic network and high biomass of diatoms, copepods (resident and vertical migrants), fish, cephalopods, marine mammals, and seabirds, including fast-swimming visual predators taking advantage of the high-light environment. The suitability of conditions for recruitment and reproduction depends on the characteristics of the water column, which vary spatially and impact productivity rates, species composition, and community size structure. Mid-ocean subtropical gyres, for example, are characteristically oligotrophic, with lower productivity than other parts of the ocean surface. In contrast to the rest of the epipelagic zone, upwelling zones are characterised by specific patterns of water movement that drive high nutrient levels, productivity, and abundant forage fish, and are therefore included in a different functional group (M1.9). Seasonal variation in productivity is greater at high latitudes due to lower light penetration and duration in winter compared to summer. The habitat and lifecycle of some specialised pelagic species (e.g. herbivorous copepods, flying fish) are entirely contained within epipelagic ocean waters, but many commonly occurring crustaceans, fish, and cephalopods undertake either diel or ontogenetic vertical migration between the epipelagic and deeper oceanic layers. These organisms exploit the food available in the productive epipelagic zone either at night (when predation risk is lower) or for the entirety of their less mobile, juvenile life stages. Horizontal migration is also common and some species (e.g. tuna and migratory whales) swim long distances to feed and reproduce. Other species use horizontal currents for passive migration, particularly smaller planktonic organisms or life stages, e.g. copepods and small pelagic fish larvae moving between spawning and feeding grounds. Unconsumed plankton and dead organisms sink from this upper oceanic zone, providing an important particulate source of nutrients to deeper, aphotic zones.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The epipelagic zone is structured by a strong depth gradient in light, which varies seasonally at high latitudes. Light also varies with local turbidity, but at lower latitudes may extend to ~200 m where light attenuates to 1% of surface levels. Interaction at the surface between the ocean and atmosphere leads to increased seasonality, mixing, and warming, and makes this the most biologically and physicochemically variable ocean layer. Nutrient levels are spatially variable as a result. Salinity varies with terrestrial freshwater inputs, evaporation, and mixing, with greater variation in semi-enclosed areas (e.g. the Mediterranean Sea) than the open ocean.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
The surface layer of the entire open ocean beyond the near-shore zone.

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative distributions of these marine pelagic ecosystem functional groups were derived from bathymetric spatial data obtained from Becker et al. (2009) using depth range thresholds cited in respective descriptive profiles for each functional group. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Sutton TT (2013) Vertical ecology of the pelagic ocean: Classical patterns and new perspectives. Journal of Fish Biology 83: 1508‐1527.
* Stal LJ (2016) The euphotic realm. In The Marine Microbiome (Eds. LJ Stal, MS Cretoiu), pp. 209-225. Springer, Switzerland.
* Anderson TR, Martin AP, Lampitt RS, Trueman CN, Henson SA, Mayor D J (2019) Quantifying carbon fluxes from primary production to mesopelagic fish using a simple food web model. ICES Journal of Marine Science 76, 690–701
### Map References
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*, **Marine Geodesy** 32: 355-371. DOI:[10.1080/01490410903297766](https://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
