---
name: M2.2 Mesopelagic ocean water
biome: M2. Pelagic ocean waters biome
realm: Marine
code: M2.2
biomecode: M2
contributors: KE Watermeyer, EJ Gregr, RR Rykaczewski, IG Priede, TT Sutton, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

The mesopelagic, dysphotic, or ‘twilight’ zone begins below the epipelagic layer and receives enough light to discern diurnal cycles but too little for photosynthesis. The trophic network is therefore dominated by detritivores and predators. The diverse organisms within this layer consume and reprocess allochthonous organic material sinking from the upper, photosynthetic layer. Hence, upper mesopelagic waters include layers of concentrated plankton, bacteria, and other organic matter sinking from the heterogeneous epipelagic zone (M2.1). Consumers of this material including detritivorous copepods deplete oxygen levels in the mesopelagic zone, more so than in other layers where oxygen can be replenished via diffusion and mixing at the surface or photosynthesis (as in the epipelagic zone), or where lower particulate nutrient levels limit biological processes (as in the deeper layers). Many species undertake diel vertical migration into the epipelagic zone during the night to feed when predation risk is lower. These organisms use the mesopelagic zone as a refuge during the day and increase the flow of carbon between ocean layers. Bioluminescence is a common trait present in more than 90% of mesopelagic organisms often with silvery reflective skin (e.g. lantern fish). Fish in the lower mesopelagic zone (>700 m) are less reflective and mobile due to reduced selection pressure from visual predators in low light conditions. These systems are difficult to sample, but advances in estimating fish abundances indicate that biomass is very high, possibly two orders of magnitude larger than global fisheries landings (1 × 1010 t).

# Ecological Drivers

Nutrient and energy availability depend on allochthonous fluxes of carbon from the upper ocean. Energy assimilation from sunlight is negligible. This is characteristically episodic and linked to events in the epipelagic zone. Buffered from surface forcing by epipelagic waters, the mesopelagic zone is less spatially and temporally variable, but the interface between the two zones is characterised by heterogeneous regions with greater biotic diversity. Areas of physicochemical discontinuity (e.g. current and water-mass boundaries and eddies) also result in niche habitats with increased local diversity. Oxygen minimum zones are formed in mesopelagic waters when biological activity reduces oxygen levels in a water mass that is then restricted from mixing by physical processes or features. Oxygen minimum zones support specialised biota and have high levels of biological activity around their borders.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Global oceans from a depth of ~200 m or where <1% of light penetrates, down to 1,000 m.

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative distributions of these marine pelagic Ecosystem Functional Groups were derived from bathymetric spatial data obtained from Becker et al. (2009) using depth range thresholds cited in respective descriptive profiles for each functional group. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Robinson C, Steinberg DK, Anderson TR, Aristegui J, Carlson CA, Frost JR, Ghiglione JF, Hernández-León S, Jackson GA, Koppelmann R (2010) Mesopelagic zone ecology and biogeochemistry – a synthesis. Deep-Sea Research II. 57: 1504-1518.
* Sutton TT (2013) Vertical ecology of the pelagic ocean: Classical patterns and new perspectives. Journal of Fish Biology 83: 1508‐1527.
### Map References
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*, **Marine Geodesy** 32: 355-371. DOI:[10.1080/01490410903297766](https://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
