---
name: M2.3 Bathypelagic ocean waters
biome: M2. Pelagic ocean waters biome
realm: Marine
code: M2.3
biomecode: M2
contributors: C Linardich, TT Sutton, IG Priede, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These are deep, open-ocean ecosystems in the water column, generally between 1,000–3,000 m in depth. Energy sources are allochthonous, derived mainly from the fallout of particulate organic matter from the epipelagic horizon (M2.1). Total biomass declines exponentially from an average of 1.45 mgC m-3 at 1,000 m depth to 0.16 mgC m-3 at 3,000 m. Trophic structure is truncated, with no primary producers. Instead, the major components are zooplankton, micro-crustaceans (e.g. shrimps), medusozoans (e.g. jellyfish), cephalopods, and four main guilds of fish (gelativores, zooplanktivores, micronektivores, and generalists). These organisms generally do not migrate vertically, in contrast to those in the mesopelagic zone (M2.2). Larvae often hatch from buoyant egg masses at the surface to take advantage of food sources. Long generation lengths (>20 years in most fish) and low fecundity reflect low energy availability. Fauna typically have low metabolic rates, with bathypelagic fish having rates of oxygen consumption ~10% of that of epipelagic fish. Fish are consequently slow swimmers with high water content in muscles and relatively low red-to-white muscle tissue ratios. They also have low-density bodies, reduced skeletons, and/or specialised buoyancy organs to achieve neutral buoyancy for specific depth ranges. Traits related to the lack of light include reduced eyes, lack of pigmentation, and enhanced vibratory and chemosensory organs. Some planktonic forms, medusas, and fish have internal light organs that produce intrinsic or bacterial bioluminescence to attract prey items or mates or to defend themselves. Most of the biota possess cell membranes with specialised phospholipid composition, intrinsic protein modifications, and protective osmolytes (i.e. organic compounds that influence the properties of biological fluids) to optimise protein function at high pressure.

# Ecological Drivers

No light penetrates from the ocean surface to bathypelagic waters. Oxygen concentrations are not limiting to aerobic respiration (mostly 3–7 mL.L-1) and are recharged through thermohaline circulation by cooling. Oxygenated water is circulated globally from two zones (the Weddell Sea and the far North Atlantic Ocean) where ice formation and surface cooling create high-salinity, oxygenated water that sinks and is subsequently circulated globally via the ‘great ocean conveyor’. Re-oxygenation frequency varies from 300 to 1,000 years, depending on the circulation route. More local thermohaline circulation occurs by evaporation in the Mediterranean and Red Seas, resulting in warm temperatures (13–15°C) at great depths. Otherwise, bathypelagic temperatures vary from −1°C in polar waters to 2–4°C in tropical and temperate waters. Nutrient levels are low and derive from the fall of organic remains from surface horizons. Pressure varies with depth from 100 to 300 atmospheres.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

All oceans and deep seas beyond the continental slope and within a depth range of 1,000 – 3,000 m.

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative distributions of these marine pelagic Ecosystem Functional Groups were derived from bathymetric spatial data obtained from Becker et al. (2009) using depth range thresholds cited in respective descriptive profiles for each functional group. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Priede, IG (2017) Deep-sea fishes: Biology, diversity, ecology and fisheries. Chapter 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. doi:10.1017/9781316018330
### Map References
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*, **Marine Geodesy** 32: 355-371. DOI:[10.1080/01490410903297766](https://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
