---
name: M2.4 Abyssopelagic ocean waters
biome: M2. Pelagic ocean waters biome
realm: Marine
code: M2.4
biomecode: M2
contributors: C Linardich, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-27 22:20:49
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These deep, open-ocean ecosystems span depths from 3,000 to 6,000 m. Autotrophs are absent and energy sources are entirely allochthonous. Particulate organic debris is imported principally from epipelagic horizons (M2.1) and the flux of matter diminishing through the mesopelagic zone (M2.2) and bathypelagic zone (M2.3). Food for heterotrophs is therefore very scarce. Due to extreme conditions and limited resources, biodiversity is very low. Total biomass declines exponentially from an average of 0.16 mg.C.m-3 at 3,000 m in depth to 0.0058 mg.C.m-3 at 6,000 m. However, there is an order of magnitude variation around the mean due to regional differences in the productivity of surface waters. Truncated trophic networks are dominated by planktonic detritivores, with low densities of gelatinous invertebrates and scavenging and predatory fish. Fauna typically have low metabolic rates and some have internal light organs that produce bioluminescence to attract prey or mates or to defend themselves. Vertebrates typically have reduced skeletons and watery tissues to maintain buoyancy. Most of the biota possesses cell membranes with specialised phospholipid composition, intrinsic protein modifications, and protective osmolytes (i.e. organic compounds that influence the properties of biological fluids) to optimise protein function at high pressure.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
No light penetrates from the ocean surface to abyssopelagic waters. Nutrient concentrations are very low and recharge is dependent on organic flux and detrital fall from the epipelagic zone. Oxygen concentrations, however, are not limiting to aerobic respiration (mostly 3–7mL.L-1) and are generally recharged through global thermohaline circulation driven by cooling in polar regions. Water temperatures vary from below zero in polar waters up to 3°C in parts of the Atlantic. Hydrostatic pressure is extremely high (300–600 atmospheres). Currents are weak, salinity is stable, and there is little spatial heterogeneity in the water column.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
All oceans and the deepest parts of the Mediterranean Sea beyond the continental slope, mid-ocean ridges, and plateaus at depths of 3,000–6,000 m.

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative distributions of these marine pelagic ecosystem functional groups were derived from bathymetric spatial data obtained from Becker et al. (2009) using depth range thresholds cited in respective descriptive profiles for each functional group. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Priede, IG (2017) Deep-sea fishes: Biology, diversity, ecology and fisheries. Chapter 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. doi:10.1017/9781316018330
### Map References
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*, **Marine Geodesy** 32: 355-371. DOI:[10.1080/01490410903297766](https://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
