---
name: M2.5 Sea ice
biome: M2. Pelagic ocean waters biome
realm: Marine
code: M2.5
biomecode: M2
contributors: JS Stark, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:14:16
---
# Ecological Traits
 
The seasonally frozen surface of polar oceans (1–2 m thick in the Antarctic and 2–3 m thick in the Arctic) may be connected to land or permanent ice shelves and is one of the most dynamic ecosystems on earth. Sympagic (i.e. ice-associated) organisms occur in all physical components of the sea-ice system including the surface, the internal matrix and brine channel system, the underside, and nearby waters modified by sea-ice presence. Primary production by microalgal and microbial communities beneath and within sea ice form the base of the food web and waters beneath sea ice develop. The standing stocks produced by these microbes are significantly greater than in ice-free areas despite shading by ice and are grazed by diverse zooplankton including krill. The sea ice underside provides refuge from surface predators and is an important nursery for juvenile krill and fish. Deepwater fish migrate vertically to feed on zooplankton beneath the sea ice. High secondary production (particularly of krill) in sea ice and around its edges supports seals, seabirds, penguins (in the Antarctic), and baleen whales. The highest trophic levels include vertebrate predators such as polar bears (in the Arctic), leopard seals, and toothed whales. Sea ice also provides resting and/or breeding habitats for pinnipeds (seals), polar bears, and penguins. As the sea ice decays annually, it releases biogenic material consumed by grazers and particulate and dissolved organic matter, nutrients, freshwater and iron, which stimulate phytoplankton growth and have important roles in biogeochemical cycling. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Sea ice is integral to the global climate system and has a crucial influence on pelagic marine ecosystems and biogeochemical processes. Sea ice limits atmosphere-ocean gas and momentum exchanges, regulates sea temperature, reflects solar radiation, acquires snow cover, and redistributes freshwater to lower latitudes. The annual retreat of sea ice during spring and summer initiates high phytoplankton productivity at the marginal ice zone and provides a major resource for grazing zooplankton, including krill. Polynyas, where areas of low ice concentration are bounded by high ice concentrations, have very high productivity levels. Most sea ice is pack-ice transported by wind and currents. Fast ice forms a stationary substrate anchored to the coast, icebergs, glaciers, and ice shelves and can persist for decades. 
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Arctic Ocean 0–45°N (Japan) or only to 80°N (Spitsbergen). Southern Ocean 55–70°S. At maximum extent, sea ice covers ~5% of the Northern Hemisphere and 8% of the Southern Hemisphere. 

{% capture map_det %}
Indicative distributions of sea ice were obtained from Fetterer et al. (2017). To approximate the maximum annual global extent, we used the monthly extent for March 2019 for the northern hemisphere, and the monthly extent for September 2018 for the southern hemisphere. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Brierley AS, Thomas DN (2002) Ecology of Southern Ocean pack ice. Advances in Marine Biology 43: 171-276. Academic Press.
* Arrigo KR, Thomas DN (2004) Large scale importance of sea ice biology in the Southern Ocean. Antarctic Science 16: 471-486.
* Horner R., Ackley, SF, Dieckmann GS, Gulliksen B, Hoshiai T, Legendre L, Melnikov IA, Reeburgh WS, Spindler M, Sullivan CW, (1992) Ecology of sea ice biota. Polar Biology 12: 417-427.
### Map References
* Fetterer F, Knowles K, Meier WN, Savoie M, Windnagel AK (2017) Sea Ice Index, Version 3. Monthly Sea Ice Extent. Boulder, Colorado USA. NSIDC: National Snow and Ice Data Center. https://doi.org/10.7265/N5K072F8. [updated daily, Accessed September 2019].
