---
name: M3.1 Continental and island slopes
biome: M3. Deep sea floors biome
realm: Marine
code: M3.1
biomecode: M3
contributors: E Ramirez-Llodra, UC Fernandez-Arcaya, IG Priede, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-28 09:53:37
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These aphotic heterotrophic ecosystems fringe the margins of continental plates and islands, extending from the shelf break (~250 m depth) to the abyssal basins (4,000 m). These large sedimentary slopes with localised rocky outcrops are characterised by strong depth gradients in the biota and may be juxtaposed with specialised ecosystems such as submarine canyons (M3.2), deep-water biogenic systems (M3.6), and chemosynthetic seeps (M3.7), as well as landslides and oxygen-minimum zones. Energy sources are derived mostly from lateral advection from the shelf and vertical fallout of organic matter particles through the water column and pelagic fauna impinging on the slopes, which varies seasonally with the productivity of the euphotic layers. Other inputs of organic matter include sporadic pulses of large falls (e.g. whale falls and wood falls). Photoautotrophs and resident herbivores are absent and the trophic network is dominated by microbial decomposers, detritivores, and their predators. Depth-related gradients result in a marked bathymetric zonation of faunal communities, and there is significant basin-scale endemism in many taxa. The taxonomic diversity of these heterotrophs is high and reaches a maximum at middle to lower depths. The biomass of megafauna decreases with depth and the meio-fauna and macro-fauna become relatively more important, but maximum biomass occurs on mid-slopes in some regions. The megafauna is often characterised by sparse populations of detritivores, including echinoderms, crustaceans, and demersal fish, but sessile benthic organisms are scarce and the bottom is typically bare, unconsolidated sediments.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The continental slopes are characterised by strong environmental depth gradients in pressure, temperature, light, and food. Limited sunlight penetration permits some visual predation but no photosynthesis below 250 m and rapidly diminishes with depth, with total darkness (excluding bioluminescence) below 1,000 m. Hydrostatic pressure increases with depth (1 atmosphere every 10 m). Temperature drastically shifts below the thermocline from warmer surface waters to cold, deep water (1–3°C), except in the Mediterranean Sea (13°C) and the Red Sea (21°C). Food quantity and quality decrease with increasing depth, as heterotrophic zooplankton efficiently use the labile compounds of the descending particulate organic matter. Sediments on continental slopes provide important ecosystem services, including nutrient regeneration and carbon sequestration.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Fringing the margins of all ocean basins and oceanic islands. Extending beneath 11% of the ocean surface at depths of 250–4,000 m.

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences of continental and island slopes was based on the ‘slope’ geomorphic unit of Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Menot L, Sibuet M, Carney RS, Levin LA, Rowe GT, Billett DSM et al. (2010) New perceptions of continental margin biodiversity. In: ’Life in the world’s oceans: diversity, distribution and abundance’ (Ed. AD McIntyre), Chapter 5, pp 79-101. Blackwell, Chichester.
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
