---
name: M3.2 Submarine canyons
biome: M3. Deep sea floors biome
realm: Marine
code: M3.2
biomecode: M3
contributors: UC Fernandez de Arcaya, E Ramirez-Llodra, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Submarine canyons are major geomorphic features that function as dynamic flux routes for resources between continental shelves and ocean basins. As a result, canyons are one of the most productive and biodiverse habitats in the deep sea. Habitat heterogeneity and temporal variability are key features of submarine canyons, with the diversity of topographic and hydrodynamic features and substrate types (e.g. mud, sand, and rocky walls) within and among canyons contributing to their highly diverse heterotrophic faunal assemblages. Photoautotrophs are present only at the heads of some canyons. Canyons are characterised by meio-, macro-, and mega-fauna assemblages with greater abundances and/or biomass than adjacent continental slopes (M3.1) due mainly to the greater quality and quantity of food inside canyon systems. Habitat complexity and high resource availability make canyons important refuges, nurseries, spawning areas, and regional source populations for fish, crustaceans, and other benthic biota. Steep exposed rock and strong currents may facilitate the development of dense communities of sessile predators and filter-feeders such as cold-water corals and sponges, engineering complex three-dimensional habitats. Soft substrates favour high densities of pennatulids and detritivores such as echinoderms. The role of canyons as centres of carbon deposition makes them an extraordinary habitat for deep-sea deposit-feeders, which represent the dominant mobile benthic trophic guild. The high productivity attracts pelagic-associated secondary and tertiary consumers, including cetaceans, which may visit canyons for feeding and breeding.

# Ecological Drivers

Submarine canyons vary in their origin, length, depth range (mean: 2,000 m), hydrodynamics, sedimentation patterns, and biota. Their complex topography modifies regional currents, inducing local upwelling, downwelling, and other complex hydrodynamic processes (e.g. turbidity currents, dense shelf water cascading, and internal waves). Through these processes, canyons act as geomorphic conduits of water masses, sediments, and organic matter from the productive coastal shelf to deep basins. This is particularly evident in shelf-incising canyons directly affected by riverine inputs and other coastal processes. Complex hydrodynamic patterns enhance nutrient levels and food inputs mostly through downward lateral advection but also by local upwelling, active biological transport by vertical migration of organisms, and passive fall of organic flux of varied particles sizes. Differences among canyons are driven primarily by variation in the abundance and quality of food sources, as well as finer-scale drivers including the variability of water mass structure (i.e. turbidity, temperature, salinity, and oxygen gradients), seabed geomorphology, depth, and substratum.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Submarine canyons cover 11.2% of continental slopes, with 9,000 large canyons recorded globally. Most of their extent is distributed below 200 m, with a mean depth of 2,000 m.

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences of submarine canyons was based on the ‘canyons’ geomorphic unit of Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Fernandez-Arcaya U, Ramirez-Llodra E, Aguzzi J, Allcock AL, Davies JS et al. (2017) Ecological role of submarine canyons and need for canyon conservation: a review. Frontiers in Marine Science 4: 5. 
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
