---
name: M3.3 Abyssal plains
biome: M3. Deep sea floors biome
realm: Marine
code: M3.3
biomecode: M3
contributors: E Ramirez-Llodra, IG Priede, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-28 09:59:04
---
# Ecological Traits
 
This is the largest group of benthic marine ecosystems, extending between 3,000 and 6,000 m depth and covered by thick layers (up to thousands of metres) of fine sediment. Less than 1% of the seafloor has been investigated biologically. Tests of giant protozoans and the lebensspuren (i.e. tracks, borrows, and mounds) made by megafauna structure the habitats of smaller organisms. Ecosystem engineering aside, other biotic interactions among large fauna are weak due to the low densities of organisms. Abyssal communities are heterotrophic, with energy sources derived mostly from the fallout of organic matter particles through the water column. Large carrion falls are major local inputs of organic matter and can later become important chemosynthetic environments (M3.7). Seasonal variation in particulate organic matter flux reflects temporal patterns in the productivity of euphotic layers. Input of organic matter can also be through sporadic pulses of large falls (e.g. whale falls and wood falls). Most abyssal plains are food-limited and the quantity and quality of food input to the abyssal seafloor are strong drivers shaping the structure and function of abyssal communities. Abyssal biomass is very low and dominated by meio-fauna and microorganisms that play key roles in the function of benthic communities below 3,000 m depth. The abyssal biota, however, is highly diverse, mostly composed of macro- and meio-fauna with large numbers of species new to science (up to 80% in some regions). Many species have so far been sampled only as singletons (only one specimen per species) or as a few specimens. The megafauna is often characterised by sparse populations of detritivores, notably echinoderms, crustaceans, and demersal fish. Species distribution and major functions such as community respiration and bioturbation are linked to particulate organic carbon flux. These functions modulate the important ecosystem services provided by abyssal plains, including nutrient regeneration and carbon sequestration. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
No light penetrates to abyssal depths. Hydrostatic pressure is very high (300–600 atmospheres). Water masses above abyssal plains are well oxygenated and characterised by low temperatures (−0.5–3°C), except in the Mediterranean Sea (13°C) and the Red Sea (21°C). The main driver of most abyssal communities is food, which mostly arrives to the seafloor as particulate organic carbon or ‘marine snow’. Only 0.5–2% of the primary production in the euphotic zone reaches the abyssal seafloor, with the quantity decreasing with increasing depth.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Seafloor of all oceans between 3,000 and 6,000 m depth, accounting for 76% of the total seafloor area, segmented by mid-ocean ridges, island arcs, and trenches.

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences of Abyssal plains was based on the ‘plains’ and ‘hills’ classes within the abyssal geomorphic unit of Harris et al. (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Smith CR, De Leo FC, Bernardino AF, Sweetman AK, Martinez Arbizu P (2008) Abyssal food limitation, ecosystem structure and climate change. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23: 518-528. 
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
