---
name: M3.5 Deepwater biogenic beds
biome: M3. Deep sea floors biome
realm: Marine
code: M3.5
biomecode: M3
contributors: E Ramirez-Llodra, UC Fernandez-Arcaya, S Rossi, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-28 10:13:53
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Benthic, sessile suspension-feeders such as aphotic corals, sponges, and bivalves form structurally complex, three-dimensional structures or ‘animal forests’ in the deep oceans. In contrast to their shallow-water counterparts in coastal and shelf systems (M1.5), these ecosystems are aphotic and rely on allochthonous energy sources borne in currents and pelagic fallout. The trophic web is dominated by filter-feeders, decomposers, detritivores, and predators. Primary producers and associated herbivores are only present at the interface with the photic zone (~250 m depth). The biogenic structures are slow growing but critical to local demersal biota in engineering shelter from predators and currents, particularly in shallower, more dynamic waters. They also provide stable substrates and enhance food availability. This habitat heterogeneity becomes more important with depth as stable, complex elevated substrate becomes increasingly limited. These structures and the microenvironments within them support a high diversity of associated species including symbionts, microorganisms in coral biofilm, filter-feeding epifauna, biofilm grazers, mobile predators (e.g. polychaetes and crustaceans), and benthic demersal fish. Diversity is positively related to the size, flexibility, and structural complexity of habitat-forming organisms. Their impact on hydrography and the flow of local currents increases retention of particulate matter, zooplankton, eggs and larvae from the water column. This creates positive conditions for suspension-feeders, which engineer their environment and play important roles in benthic-pelagic coupling, increasing the flux of matter and energy from the water column to the benthic community.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The productivity of surface water, the vertical flux of nutrients, water temperature, and hydrography influence the availability of food, and hence the distribution and function of deep-water biogenic beds. Although these systems occur on both hard and soft substrates, the latter are less structurally complex and less diverse. Chemical processes are important and ocean acidity is limiting. The presence of cold-water corals, for example, has been linked to the depth of aragonite saturation. Habitat-forming species prefer regions characterised by oxygenation and currents or high flow, generally avoiding oxygen-minimum zones. Benthic biogenic structures and their dependents are highly dependent on low levels of physical disturbance due to slow growth rates and recovery times.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Patchy but widespread distribution across the deep sea floor below 250 m depth. Poorly explored and possibly less common on abyssal plains.

{% capture map_det %}
The distribution of deepwater biogenic beds was based on the ‘mountains’ and ‘hills’ classes within the abyssal geomorphic unit of of Harris et al. (2014b). These were mapped in yellow as minor occurrences to acknowledges considerable uncertainties in the distribution of biogenic beds within these geomorphic units. Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Buhl‐Mortensen L, Vanreusel A, Gooday AJ et al. (2010) Biological structures as a source of habitat heterogeneity and biodiversity on the deep ocean margins. Marine Ecology 31: 21-50.
* Rossi S, Bramanti L, Gori, A, Orejas C (2017) Marine Animal Forests: The ecology of benthic biodiversity Hotspots. Springer, Berlin.
* Rossi S, Isla E, Bosch-Belmar M, Galli G, Gori A et al. (2019) Changes of energy fluxes in the marine animal forest of the Anthropocene: factors shaping the future seascape. ICES Journal of Marine Sciences 76, 2008-2019
### Map References
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
