---
name: M3.7 Chemosynthetic-based-ecosystems (CBE)
biome: M3. Deep sea floors biome
realm: Marine
code: M3.7
biomecode: M3
contributors: E Ramirez-Llodra, UC Fernandez-Arcaya, S Rossi, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Chemosynthetic-based ecosystems (CBEs) include three major types of habitats between bathyal and abyssal depths: 1) hydrothermal vents on mid-ocean ridges, back-arc basins, and active seamounts; 2) cold seeps on active and passive continental margins; and 3) large organic falls of whales or wood. All these systems are characterised by microbial primary productivity through chemoautotrophy, which uses reduced compounds (such as H2S and CH4) as energy sources instead of light. Microbes form bacterial mats and occur in trophic symbiosis with most megafauna. The continuous sources of energy and microbial symbiosis fuel high faunal biomass. However, specific environmental factors (e.g. high temperature gradients at vents, chemical toxicity, and symbiosis dependence) result in a low diversity and high endemism of highly specialised fauna. Habitat structure comprises hard substrate on vent chimneys and mostly biogenic substrate at seeps and food-falls. Most fauna is sessile or with low motility and depends on the fluids emanating at vents and seeps or chemicals produced by microbes on food-falls, and thus is spatially limited. Large tubeworms, shrimps, crabs, bivalves, and gastropods dominate many hydrothermal vents, with marked biogeographic provinces. Tubeworms, mussels, and decapod crustaceans often dominate cold seeps with demersal fish. These are patchy ecosystems where connectivity relies on the dispersal of planktonic larvae.

# Ecological Drivers

No light penetrates to deep-sea CBEs. Hydrostatic pressure is very high (30–600 atmospheres). At hydrothermal vents, very hot fluids (up to 400°C) emanate from chimneys charged with metals and chemicals that provide energy to chemoautotrophic microbes. At cold seeps, the fluids are cold and reduced chemicals originate both biogenically and abiotically. At food-falls, reduced chemicals are produced by microorganisms degrading the organic matter of the fall. The main drivers of CBEs are the chemosynthetically based primary productivity and the symbiotic relationships between microorganisms and fauna.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Seafloor of all oceans. Vents (map) occur on mid-ocean ridges, back-arc basins, and active seamounts. Cold seeps occur on active and passive continental margins. Food-falls occur mostly along cetacean migration routes (whale falls).

{% capture map_det %}
Major occurrences of Chemosynthetic-based ecosystems were based on the distribution of hydrothermal vents on spreading plate boundaries mapped in ‘Plate lines and polygons’ data by USGS/ESRI (undated). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution. The distribution of cold seeps is poorly known and was not mapped.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Tunnicliffe V, Juniper KS, Sibuet M (2003) Reducing environments of the deep-sea floor. In: Tyler PA (ed) Ecosystems of the World Vol 28 Ecosystems of the deep oceans, pp 81-110. Elsevier, London.
### Map References
* ‘Plate lines and polygons’ data by USGS/ESRI (https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=f155b76c13c84f62864446847f1ae652, downloaded 5/5/2019)
