---
name: M4.1 Submerged artificial structures
biome: M4. Anthropogenic marine biome
realm: Marine
code: M4.1
biomecode: M4
contributors: IM Suthers, JT Claisse, TP Crowe, DA Keith
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These deployments include submerged structures with high vertical relief including ship wrecks, oil and gas infrastructure, and designed artificial reefs, as well as some low-relief structures (e.g. rubble piles). The latter do not differ greatly from adjacent natural reefs, but structures with high vertical relief are distinguished by an abundance of zooplanktivorous fish, as well as reef-associated fishes. Macroalgae are sparse or absent as the ecosystem is fed by currents and ocean swell delivering phytoplankton to sessile invertebrates. Complex surfaces quickly thicken with a biofouling community characterised by an abundance of filter-feeding invertebrates (e.g. sponges, barnacles, bivalves, and ascidians) and their predators (e.g. crabs and flatworms). Invertebrate diversity is high, with representatives from every living Phylum. Structures without complex surfaces, such as the smooth, wide expanse of a hull, may suffer the sporadic loss of all biofouling communities after storm events. This feeds the sandy bottom community, evident as a halo of benthic invertebrates (e.g. polychaetes and amphipods), which also benefit from the plume of waste and detritus drifting from the reef community. Artificial structures also provide a visual focus attracting the occasional pelagic fish and marine mammals, which respond similarly to fish-attraction devices and drift objects.

# Ecological Drivers

The high vertical relief of many artificial structures enables biota to access plankton continuously transported by currents. They may be situated on otherwise flat, soft-bottom habitats, isolated to varying degrees from other hard substrates. High-energy waters experience low variation in temperature and salinity (except near major river systems). Currents and eddies cause strong horizontal flow, while ocean swell creates orbital current velocities at least 10-fold greater. Near large urban centres, fishing reduces populations of large predatory fish, resulting in a continuum across species and deployments from purely fish attraction to fish production (such as via the reef facilitating the planktivorous food chain). The historical, opportunistic use of materials (e.g. rubber tyres, construction materials, or inadequately decommissioned vessels) have left legacies of pollutants. Compared to artificial reefs, oil and gas infrastructure is more exposed to light/noise/chemical pollution associated with operations as well as the spread of invasive species.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Millions of artificial reefs and fish-attraction devices are deployed in coastal waters worldwide, including >10,000 oil and gas structures, mostly in tropical and temperate waters. More than 500 oil and gas platforms were decommissioned and left as artificial reefs in US waters since 1940. Many others are candidates for reefing after decommissioning in coming decades (> 600 in the Asia-Pacific alone). Worldwide since 1984, over 130 ships and planes have purposely been sunk for recreational SCUBA-diving. Map is incomplete but shows areas with many documented wrecks and marine infrastructure.

{% capture map_det %}
Marine ecoregions that include occurrences of submerged artificial structures were identified by overlaying a mapped distribution of shipwrecks (Monfils, 2004) on marine ecoregions (Spalding et al., 2008). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution. In many cases these ecoregions encompassed other submerged structures such as energy infrastructure. To represent uncertainty, indicative distributions were mapped as minor occurrences.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Champion C, Suthers IM, Smith JA (2015) Zooplanktivory is a key process for fish production on a coastal artificial reef. Marine Ecology Progress Series 541:1-14.
* Claisse JT, Pondella DJ, Love M, Zahn LA, Williams CM, Williams JP, Bull AS (2014) Oil platforms off California are among the most productive marine fish habitats globally. Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 111:15462–15467.
* Lima JS., Zalmo, R, Love M (2019) Overview and trends of ecological and socioeconomic research on artificial reefs. Marine Environmental Research 145, 81-96
* Scarborough Bull A, Love MS (2020) Worldwide oil and gas platform decommissioning: A review of practices and reefing options. Ocean and Coastal Management 168, 274–306
### Map References
* Rean Monfils (2005) The global risk of marine pollution from WWII shipwrecks:  Examples from the Seven Seas. International Oil Spill Conference Proceedings: May 2005, Vol. 2005, No. 1, pp. 1049-1054.
DOI: [10.7901/2169-3358-2005-1-1049](https://doi.org/10.7901/2169-3358-2005-1-1049) [PDF from Sea Australia, Civic](http://www.seaaustralia.com/documents/The%20Global%20Risk%20of%20Marine%20Pollution%20from%20WWII%20Shipwrecks-final.pdf)
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI:[10.1641/B570707](https://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
 
