---
name: M4.2 Marine aquafarms
biome: M4. Anthropogenic marine biome
realm: Marine
code: M4.2
biomecode: M4
contributors: DA Keith, M Beveridge, LB Firth
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Marine aquafarms (i.e. mariculture) are localised, high-productivity systems within and around enclosures constructed for the breeding, rearing, and harvesting of marine plants and animals, including finfish, molluscs, crustaceans, algae, and other marine plants. Allochthonous energy and nutrient inputs are delivered by humans and by diffusion from surrounding marine waters. Autochthonous inputs are small and produced by pelagic algae or biofilms on the infrastructure, unless the target species are aquatic macrophytes. More commonly, target species are consumers that belong to middle or upper trophic levels. Diversity is low across taxa, and the trophic web is dominated by a super-abundance of target species. Where multiple target species are cultivated, they are selected to ensure neutral or mutualistic interactions with one another (e.g. detritivores that consume the waste of a higher-level consumer). Target biota are harvested periodically to produce food, fish meal, nutrient agar, horticultural products, jewellery, and cosmetics. Their high population densities are maintained by continual inputs of food and regular re-stocking to compensate harvest. Target species may be genetically modified and are often bred in intensive hatcheries and then released into the enclosures. Food and nutrient inputs may promote the abundance of non-target species including opportunistic microalgae, zooplankton, and pathogens and predators of the target species. These pest species or their impacts may be controlled by antibiotics or herbicides or by culling (e.g. pinnipeds around fish farms). The enclosures constitute barriers to the movement of larger organisms, but some cultivated stock may escape, while wild individuals from the surrounding waters may invade the enclosure. Enclosures are generally permeable to small organisms, propagules and waste products of larger organisms, nutrients, and pathogens, enabling the ecosystem to extend beyond the confines of the infrastructure.

# Ecological Drivers

Most marine farms are located in sheltered coastal waters but some are located in the open ocean or on land in tanks or ponds filled with seawater. Those in marine waters experience currents, tides, and flow-through of marine energy, matter, and biota characteristic of the surrounding environment. Those on land are more insular, with intensively controlled light and temperature, recirculation systems that filter and recycle water and waste, and intensive anthropogenic inputs of food and nutrients, anti-fouling chemicals, antibiotics, and herbicides. Marine enclosures have netting and frames that provide substrates for biofilms and a limited array of benthic organisms, but usually exclude the benthos. Land-based systems have smooth walls and floors that provide limited habitat heterogeneity for benthic biota.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Rapidly expanding around coastal Asia, Europe, North America and Mesoamerica, and southern temperate regions. Open-ocean facilities near Hawaii and Puerto Rico.

{% capture map_det %}
Marine ecoregions (Spalding et al., 2008) containing marine aquafarms were identified by consulting global and regional reviews, suitability maps (Gentry et al., 2017) and expertise of authors, proofed by specialist reviewers. These were clipped to the extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris et al. (2014b) and converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution. Occurrences were aggregated to half degree spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Beveridge M (2008). Cage Aquaculture. Wiley, Oxford.
* Froehlich HE, Smith A, Gentry RR, Halpern BS (2017) Offshore aquaculture: I know it when I see it. Frontiers in Marine Science 4, 154.
### Map References
* Gentry RR, Froehlich HE, Grimm D, Kareiva P, Parke M, Rust M, Gaines SD, Halpern BS (2017) Mapping the global potential for marine aquaculture. Nature Ecology & Evolution 1: 1317–1324.
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI:[10.1641/B570707](https://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
 
