---
name: S1.1 Aerobic caves
biome: S1. Subterranean lithic biome
realm: Subterranean
code: S1.1
biomecode: S1
contributors: DA Keith, GC Hose
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Dark subterranean air-filled voids support simple, low productivity systems. The trophic network is truncated and dominated by heterotrophs, with no representation of photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Diversity is low, comprising detritivores and their pathogens and predators, although there may be a few specialist predators confined to resource-rich hotspots, such as bat latrines or seeps. Biota include invertebrates (notably beetles, springtails, and arachnids), fungi, bacteria, and transient vertebrates, notably bats, which use surface-connected caves as roosts and breeding sites. Bacteria and fungi form biofilms on rock surfaces. Fungi are more abundant in humid microsites. Some are parasites and many are critical food sources for invertebrates and protozoans. Allochthonous energy and nutrients are imported via seepage moisture, tree roots, bats, and other winged animals. This leads to fine-scale spatial heterogeneity in resource distribution, reflected in patterns of biotic diversity and abundance. Autochthonous energy can be produced by chemoautotrophs. For example, chemoautotrophic Proteobacteria are prominent in subterranean caves formed by sulphide springs. They fix carbon through sulphide oxidation, producing sulphuric acid and gypsum residue in snottite draperies (i.e. microbial mats), accelerating chemical corrosion. The majority of biota are obligate subterranean organisms that complete their life cycles below ground. These are generalist detritivores and some are also opportunistic predators, reflecting the selection pressure of food scarcity. Distinctive traits include specialised non-visual sensory organs, reduced eyes, pigmentation and wings, elongated appendages, long lifespans, slow metabolism and growth, and low fecundity. Other cave taxa are temporary below-ground inhabitants, have populations living entirely above- or below-ground, or life cycles necessitating use of both environments. The relative abundance and diversity of temporary inhabitants decline rapidly with distance from the cave entrance. The specialist subterranean taxa belong to relatively few evolutionary lineages that either persisted as relics in caves after the extinction of above-ground relatives or diversified after colonisation by above-ground ancestors. Although diversity is low, local endemism is high, reflecting insularity and limited connectivity between cave systems.

# Ecological Drivers

Most caves form from the chemical weathering of limestone, dolomite or gypsum, either from surface waters or from phreatic waters. Caves also derive from lava tubes and other substrates. Characteristics include the absence of light except at openings, low variability in temperature and humidity, and scarcity of nutrients. The high physical fragmentation of cave substrates limits biotic connectivity and promotes insular evolution in stable conditions.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Scattered worldwide, but mostly in the Northern Hemisphere, in limestone (map), basalt flows, and rarely in other lithic substrates.

{% capture map_det %}
Distributions of Aerobic caves were based on mapped area of carbonate rock outcrop (Williams & Ting Fong 2016). This. provides an upper limit on the area of exposed karst terrain, as not all carbonate rocks are karstified. Lava tubes and other rocks that may contain these ecosystem functional groups are not shown on this indicative map, but are less extensive than those in carbonate rock.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Engel AS (2010) Microbial diversity of cave ecosystems. In: Geomicrobiology: Molecular and environmental perspective (Eds. LL Barton, M Mandl, A Loy), pp219-238. Springer, Dordrecht. 
* Gibert J, Deharveng L (2002) Subterranean ecosystems: a truncated functional biodiversity. BioScience 52, 473-481.
### Map References
* Williams P, Ting Fong Y (2016) *World map of carbonate rock outcrops v3.0*. The University of Auckland, Auckland. [Webpage](https://www.fos.auckland.ac.nz/our_research/karst/)
