---
name: S1.2 Endolithic systems
biome: S1. Subterranean lithic biome
realm: Subterranean
code: S1.2
biomecode: S1
contributors: DA Keith, TM Iliffe, V Gerovasileiou, B Gonzalez, D Brankovits, A Martínez García
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Lithic matrices and their microscopic cracks and cavities host microbial communities. Their very low productivity is constrained by the scarcity of light, nutrients, and water, and sometimes also by high temperatures. Diversity is low and the trophic network is truncated, supporting microscopic bacteria, archaea, viruses, and unicellular eukaryotes. Most are detritivores or lithoautotrophs, which derive energy, oxidants, carbohydrates, and simple organic acids from carbon dioxide, geological sources of hydrogen, and mineral compounds of potassium, iron and sulphur. Some fissures are large enough to support small eukaryotic predators such as nematodes. Photoautotrophs (i.e. cyanobacteria) are present only in the surface layers of exposed rocks. Sampling suggests that these systems harbour 95% of the world’s prokaryote life (bacteria and archaea), with rocks below the deep oceans and continents containing similar densities of cells and potentially accounting for a significant proportion of sequestered carbon. Endolithic microbes are characterised by extremely slow reproductive rates, especially in deep sedimentary rocks, which are the most oligotrophic substrates. At some depth within both terrestrial and marine substrates, microbes are sustained by energy from organic matter that percolates through fissures from surface systems. In deeper or less permeable parts of the crust, however, lithoautotrophic microbes are the primary energy synthesisers that sustain heterotrophs in the food web. Methanogenic archaea and iron-reducing bacteria appear to be important autotrophs in sub-oceanic basalts. All endolithic microbes are characterised by slow metabolism and reproduction rates. At some locations they tolerate extreme pressures, temperatures (up to 125°C) and acidity (pH<2), notably in crustal fluids. Little is currently known of endemism, but it may be expected to be high based on the insularity of these ecosystems.

# Ecological Drivers

Endolithic systems are characterised by a lack of light, a scarcity of nutrients, and high pressures at depth. Temperatures vary within the crust from <20°C up to 125°C, but show little temporal variation. The chemical properties and physical structure of lithic matrices influence the supply of resources and the movement of biota. Stable cratonic massifs have minimal pore space for microbial occupation, which is limited to occasional cracks and fissures. Sedimentary substrates offer more space, but nutrients may be scarce, while fluids in basic volcanic and crustal rocks have more abundant nutrients. Chemical and biogenic weathering occurs through biogenic acids and other corrosive agents. The matrix is mostly stable, but disturbances include infrequent and spatially variable earthquakes and volcanic intrusions.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Throughout the earth's crust, from surface rocks to a predicted depth of up to 4–4.5 km below the land surface and 7–7.5 km below ocean floors.

{% capture map_det %}
Global distribution throughout the earth's crust. Not mapped.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Edwards KJ, Becker K, Colwell F (2012). The deep, dark energy biosphere: intraterrestrial life on earth. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 40, 551–568.
### Map References

