---
name: S2.1 Anthropogenic subterranean voids
biome: S2. Anthropogenic subterranean voids biome
realm: Subterranean
code: S2.1
biomecode: S2
contributors: DA Keith, TM Iliffe, V Gerovasileiou, B Gonzalez, D Brankovits, A Martínez García
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These low-productivity systems in subterranean air-filled voids are created by excavation. Although similar to Aerobic caves (S1.1), these systems are structurally simpler, younger, more geologically varied, and much less biologically diverse with few evolutionary lineages and no local endemism. Low diversity, low endemism, and opportunistic biotic traits stem from founder effects related to their recent anthropogenic origin (hence few colonisation events and little time for evolutionary divergence), as well as low microhabitat niche diversity due to the simple structure of void walls compared to natural caves. The trophic network is truncated and dominated by heterotrophs, usually with no representation of photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Generalist detritivores and their pathogens and predators dominate, although some specialists may be associated with bat dung deposits. Biota include invertebrates (notably beetles, springtails, and arachnids), fungi, bacteria, and transient vertebrates, notably bats, which use the voids as roosts and breeding sites. Bacteria and fungi form biofilms on void surfaces. Many are colonists of human inoculations, with some microbes identified as “human-indicator bacteria” (e.g. E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and high-temperature Bacillus spp.). Fungi are most abundant in humid microsites. Some are parasites and many are critical food sources for invertebrates and protozoans. Sources of energy and nutrients are allochthonous, imported by humans, bats, winged invertebrates, other animals, and seepage moisture. Many taxa have long life pans, slow metabolism and growth, and low fecundity, but lack distinctive traits found in the biota of natural caves. Some are temporary below-ground inhabitants, have populations that live entirely above- or below-ground, or have life cycles necessitating the use of both environments.

# Ecological Drivers

Excavations associated with tunnels, vaults and mines. While some are abandoned, others are continuously accessed by humans, enhancing connectivity with the surface, resource importation, and biotic dispersal. Substrates include a range of rock types as well as artificial surfaces on linings and debris piles. Air movement varies from still to turbulent (e.g. active train tunnels). Light is absent except at openings and where artificial sources are maintained by humans, sometimes supporting algae (i.e. lampenflora). Humidity and temperature are relatively constant, and nutrients are scarce except where enriched by human sources.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Scattered worldwide, but mostly associated with urban centres, transit corridors, and industrial mines.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Engel AS (2010) Microbial diversity of cave ecosystems. In: Geomicrobiology: Molecular and environmental perspective (Eds. LL Barton, M Mandl, A Loy), pp219-238. Springer, Dordrecht. 
* Gibert J, Deharveng L (2002) Subterranean ecosystems: a truncated functional biodiversity. BioScience 52, 473-481.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
