---
name: T1.1 Tropical/Subtropical lowland rainforests
biome: T1 Tropical-subtropical forests
realm: Terrestrial
code: T1.1
biomecode: T1
contributors: DA Keith
---

# Ecological traits

These closed-canopy forests are renowned for their complex structure and high primary productivity which support high functional and taxonomic diversity. Bottom-up regulatory processes are fuelled by large autochthonous energy sources that support very high primary productivity, biomass and LAI. The structurally complex, multi-layered, evergreen tree canopy has a large range of leaf sizes (typically macrophyll-notophyll) and high SLA, reflecting rapid growth and leaf turnover. Diverse plant life forms include buttressed trees, epiphytes, lianes and ferns, but grasses and hydrophytes are absent or rare. Trophic networks are complex and vertically stratified with low exclusivity and diverse representation of herbivorous, frugivorous and carnivorous vertebrates. Tree canopies support a vast diversity of invertebrate herbivores and their predators. Mammals and birds play critical roles in plant diaspore dispersal and pollination. Growth and reproductive phenology is aseasonal or weakly seasonal but reproductive masting is common in trees and regulates disapore predation. Fungal, microbial and diverse invertebrate decomposers and detritivores dominate the forest floor and the subsoil.  Diversity is high across taxa especially at upper taxonomic levels of trees, territorial vertebrates, fungi and invertebrate fauna. Neutral processes, as well as microniche partitioning may have a role in sustaining high diversity, but evidence is limited. Many plants are in shade, forming seedling banks that exploit gap-phase dynamics initiated by individual tree-fall or stand-level canopy disruption by tropical storms (especially near coasts). Seed banks regulated by dormancy are uncommon. Many trees exhibit leaf form plasticity enabling photosynthetic function in deep shade, dappled light or full sun, even on a single individual. Some species germinate on tree trunks, gaining quicker access to canopy light, while roots absorb microclimatic moisture until they reach the soil.

# Key-ecological-drivers

Precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration with low intra- and inter-annual variability, creating reliable year-round rainfall surplus, while closed tree canopies maintain humid microclimate and shade. Warm temperatures exhibit low-moderate diurnal and seasonal variability (minima rarely below 10°C). Soils are moist. but not regularly inundated or peaty (see FT1.3). Most nutrient capital is sequestered in vegetation or cycled through the dynamic litter layer, critical for retaining nutrients that would otherwise be leached or lost to runoff. Decadal regimes of tropical storms occur outside equatorial latitudes (mostly >10°) except in continental America and Africa, and drive cycles of canopy destruction and renewal.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Humid tropical and subtropical regions in central and west Africa, southeast Asia, Oceania, northeast Australia, central and tropical south America and the Caribbean.

## Map details

Terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (https://www.worldwildlife.org/biome-categories/terrestrial-ecoregions), global and regional reviews (cited in respective reference sections of profiles), maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts.

## References

### Text references
* Corlett RT, Primack RB (2011) Tropical Rain Forests: An ecological and biogeographical comparison. Second edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.

### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm, BioScience 67: 534–545.
