---
name: T1.2 Tropical/Subtropical dry forests and scrubs
biome: T1. Tropical-subtropical forests biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T1.2
biomecode: T1
contributors: RT Pennington, J Franklin, NA Brummitt, A Etter, KR Young, RT Corlett, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 20:20:56
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These closed-canopy forests and thickets have drought-deciduous or semi-deciduous phenology in at least some woody plants (rarely fully evergreen), and thus seasonally high LAI. Strongly seasonal photoautotrophic productivity is limited by a regular annual water deficit/surplus cycle. Diversity is lower across most taxa than T1.1, but tree and vertebrate diversity is high relative to most other forest systems. Plant growth forms and leaf sizes are less diverse than in T1.1. Grasses are rare or absent, except on savanna ecotones, due to canopy shading and/or water competition, while epiphytes, ferns, bryophytes, and forbs are present but limited by seasonal drought. Trophic networks are complex with low exclusivity and diverse representation of herbivorous, frugivorous, and carnivorous vertebrates. Fungi and other microbes are important decomposers of abundant leaf litter. Many woody plants are dispersed by wind and some by vertebrates. Most nutrient capital is sequestered in vegetation or cycled through the litter layer. Trees typically have thin bark and low fire tolerance and can recruit in shaded microsites. Plants are tolerant of seasonal drought but can exploit moisture when it is seasonally available through high SLA and plastic productivity. Gap-phase dynamics are driven primarily by individual tree-fall and exploited by seedling banks and vines (seedbanks are uncommon). These forests may be involved in fire-regulated stable-state dynamics with savannas.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Overall water surplus (or small deficit <100 mm), but a substantial seasonal deficit in winter in which little or no rain falls within a 4–7-month period. Warm temperatures (minima rarely <10°C) with low-moderate diurnal and seasonal variability in the tropics, but greater seasonal variability in subtropical continental areas. Diverse substrates generally produce high levels of nutrients. Tropical storms may be important disturbances in some areas but flammability is low due to limited ground fuels except on savanna ecotones. 
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Seasonally dry tropical and subtropical regions in Central and West Africa, Madagascar, southern Asia, north and northern and eastern Australia, the Pacific, Central and South America and the Caribbean.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* DRYFLOR, Banda-R K, Delgado-Salinas A, Dexter KG et al. (2016) Plant diversity patterns in neotropical dry forests and their conservation implications. Science 353:1383-1387.
* Pennington RT, Lewis G, Ratter J (2006) Neotropical savannas and dry forests: plant diversity, biogeography and conservation.  CRC Press, Florida.
* Murphy PG, Lugo AE (1986) Ecology of tropical dry forest. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 17:67–88.
* Bunyavejchewin SC, Baker P, Davis SJ (2011) Seasonally dry tropical forests in continental southeast Asia - structure, composition, and dynamics. In: The ecology and conservation of seasonally dry forests in Asia. WJ McShea, SJ Davis, N Bhumpakphan, (Eds), pp. 9-35. Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, Washington DC.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
