---
name: T1.3 Tropical/Subtropical montane rainforests
biome: T1. Tropical-subtropical forests biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T1.3
biomecode: T1
contributors: DA Keith, NA Brummitt, KR Young, RT Corlett, A Etter
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Closed-canopy evergreen forests on tropical mountains usually have a single-layer low tree canopy (~5–20m tall) with small leaf sizes (microphyll-notophyll) and moderate-high SLA. They transition to lowland rainforests (T1.1) with decreasing altitude and to warm temperate forests (T2.4) at higher latitudes. Structure and taxonomic diversity become more diminutive and simpler with altitude, culminating in elfinwood forms. Conspicuous epiphytic ferns, bryophytes, lichens, orchids, and bromeliads drape tree branches and exploit atmospheric moisture (cloud stripping), but grasses are rare or absent, except for bamboos in some areas. Moderate productivity fuelled by autochthonous energy is limited by high exposure to UV-B radiation, cool temperatures, and sometimes by shallow soil or wind exposure. Limited energy and sequestration in humic soils may limit N and P uptake. Growth and reproductive phenology is usually seasonal. Plant propagules are dispersed mostly by wind and territorial birds and mammals. Tree diversity is moderate to low, while epiphytes are diverse, but there is often high local endemism at higher altitudes in most groups, especially amphibians, birds, plants, and invertebrates. Gap-phase dynamics are driven by tree-fall, landslides, lightning strikes, or in some areas more rarely by extreme wind storms. Seedling banks are common (seedbanks are uncommon) and most plants are shade tolerant and can recruit in the shade.

# Ecological Drivers

Substantial cloud moisture and high humidity underpin a reliable year-round rainfall surplus over evapotranspiration. Altitudinal gradients in temperature, precipitation, and exposure are pivotal in ecosystem structure and function. Frequent cloud cover from orographic uplift and closed tree canopies maintain a moist microclimate and shady conditions. Temperatures are mild-cool with occasional frost. Seasonal variability is low-moderate but diurnal variability is moderate-high. Winter monthly mean minima may be around 0°C in some areas. Landslides are a significant form of disturbance that drives successional dynamics on steep slopes and is exacerbated by extreme rainfall events. Mountains experience elevated UV-B radiation with altitude and, in some regions, are exposed to local or regional storms.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Humid tropical and subtropical regions in East Africa, East Madagascar, Southeast Asia, west Oceania, northeast Australia, Central and tropical South America.

{% capture map_det %}
The distribution of tropical montane rainforest was approximated from a model of environmental suitability based on climatic variables and cloud cover (Wilson and Jetz, 2016, Karger et al. 2021). Occurrences were aggregated to half degree spatial resolution and cells reclassified as major occurrences (>25% of cell area) and minor occurrences (< 25% of cell area).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Ashton PS, Seidler R (2014) ‘On the forests of tropical Asia: lest the memory fade.’ (Kew Publishing: Kew)

* Gradstein SR, Homeier J, Gansert D (2008) The tropical mountain forest – patterns and processes in a biodiversity hotspot. Biodiversity and Ecology Series 2. Göttingen, Centre for Biodiversity and Ecology.
* Hamilton LS, Juvik JO, Scatena FN (1995) Tropical Montane Cloud Forests. Ecological Studies. 110. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
### Map References
* Karger, D.N., Kessler, M., Lehnert, M. et al. Limited protection and ongoing loss of tropical cloud forest biodiversity and ecosystems worldwide. Nat Ecol Evol (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-021-01450-y
* Wilson AM, Jetz W (2016) *Remotely Sensed High-Resolution Global Cloud Dynamics for Predicting Ecosystem and Biodiversity Distributions*. **PLoS Biol** 14(3): e1002415. doi:[10.1371/journal.pbio.1002415](http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002415). [Dataset available on-line](http://www.earthenv.org/)
