---
name: T2.1 Boreal and temperate high montane forests and woodlands
biome: T2. Temperate-boreal forests and woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T2.1
biomecode: T2
contributors: DA Keith, D Faber-Langendoen, T Kontula, J Franklin, NA Brummitt
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Evergreen, structurally simple forests and woodlands in cold climates are dominated by needle-leaf conifers and may include a subdominant component of deciduous trees, especially in disturbed sites, accounting for up to two-thirds of stand-level leaf biomass. Boreal forests are generally less diverse, more cold-tolerant and support a more migratory fauna than temperate montane forests. Structure varies from dense forest up to 30 m tall to stunted open woodlands <5 m tall. Large trees engineer habitats of many fungi, non-vascular plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates that depend on rugose bark, coarse woody debris, or large tree canopies. Energy is mainly from autochthonous sources but may include allochthonous subsidies from migratory vertebrates. Primary productivity is limited by seasonal cold and may also be limited by water deficit on coarse textured soils. Forested bogs occupy peaty soils (TF1.6). Seasonal primary productivity may sustain a trophic web with high densities of small and large herbivores (e.g. hare, bear, deer, and insects), with feline, canine, and raptor predators. Browsers are top-down regulators of plant biomass and cyclers of nitrogen, carbon, and nutrients. Forest structure may be disrupted by insect defoliation or fires on multi-decadal cycles. Tree recruitment occurs semi-continuously in gaps or episodically after canopy fires and may be limited by spring frost, desiccation, permafrost fluctuations, herbivory, and surface fires. Plants and animals have strongly seasonal growth and reproductive phenology and possess morphological, behavioural, and ecophysiological traits enabling cold-tolerance and the exploitation of short growing seasons. Plant traits include bud protection, extra-cellular freezing tolerance, hardened evergreen needle leaves with low SLA or deciduous leaves with high SLA, cold-stratification seed dormancy, seasonal geophytic growth forms, and vegetative storage organs. Tracheids in conifers confer resistance to cavitation in drought by compartmentalising water transport tissues. Some large herbivores and most birds migrate to winter habitats from the boreal zone, and thus function as mobile links, dispersing other biota and bringing allochthonous subsidies of energy and nutrients into the system. Hibernation is common among sedentary vertebrates, while insect life cycles have adult phases cued to spring emergence.

# Ecological Drivers

These systems are driven by large seasonal temperature ranges, cold winters with prolonged winter snow, low light, short growing seasons (1–3 months averaging >10°C) and severe post-thaw frosts. There is an overall water surplus, but annual precipitation can be <200 mm. Soil moisture recharged by winter snow sustains the system through evapotranspiration peaks in summer, but moisture can be limiting where these systems extend to mountains in warm semi-arid latitudes. The acid soils usually accumulate peat and upper horizons may be frozen in winter. Forests may be prone to lightning-induced canopy fires on century time scales and surface fires on multi-decadal scales.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Boreal distribution across Eurasia and North America, extending to temperate (rarely subtropical) latitudes on mountains.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Bonan GB, Shugart HH (1989) *Environmental Factors and Ecological Processes in Boreal Forests*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** 20: 1-28. DOI:[10.1146/annurev.es.20.110189.000245](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.20.110189.000245)
* Crawford RMM (2013) **Tundra-taiga biology**. Ch 5. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* Larsen JA (1980) **The boreal ecosystem**. Academic Press, New York.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
