---
name: T2.2 Deciduous temperate forests
biome: T2. Temperate-boreal forests and woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T2.2
biomecode: T2
contributors: DA Keith, NA Brummitt, F Essl, D Faber-Langendoen
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 20:42:53
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These structurally simple, winter deciduous forests have high productivity and LAI in summer. Winter dormancy, hibernation and migration are common life histories among plants and animals enabling cold avoidance. Local endemism is comparatively low and there are modest levels of diversity across major taxa. The forest canopy comprises at least two-thirds deciduous broad-leaf foliage (notophylll-mesophyll) with high SLA and up to one-third evergreen (typically needleleaf) cover. As well as deciduous woody forms, annual turnover of above-ground biomass also occurs some in non-woody geophytic and other ground flora, which are insulated from the cold beneath winter snow and flower soon after snowmelt before tree canopy closure. Annual leaf turnover is sustained by fertile substrates and water surplus, with nutrient withdrawal from foliage and storage of starch prior to fall. Tissues are protected from cold by supercooling rather than extra-cellular freeze-tolerance. Dormant buds are insulated from frost by bracts or by burial below the soil in some non-woody plants. Fungal and microbial decomposers play vital roles in cycling carbon and nutrients in the soil surface horizon. Despite highly seasonal primary productivity, the trophic network includes large browsing herbivores (deer), smaller granivores and herbivores (rodents and hares), and mammalian predators (canids and felines). Most invertebrates are seasonally active. Behavioural and life-history traits allow animals to persist through cold winters, including through dense winter fur, food caching, winter foraging, hibernation, dormant life phases, and migration. Migratory animals provide allochthonous subsidies of energy and nutrients and promote incidental dispersal of other biota. Browsing mammals and insects are major consumers of plant biomass and cyclers of nitrogen, carbon, and nutrients. Deciduous trees may be early colonisers of disturbed areas (later replaced by evergreens) but are also stable occupants across large temperate regions. Tree recruitment is limited by spring frost, allelopathy, and herbivory, and occurs semi-continuously in gaps. Herbivores may influence densities of deciduous forest canopies by regulating tree regeneration. Deciduous leaf fall may exert allelopathic control over tree seedlings and seasonal ground flora.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Phenological processes in these forests are driven by large seasonal temperature ranges, (mean winter temperatures <−1°C, summer means up to 22°C), typically with substantial winter snow and limited growing season, with 4–6 months >10°C, and severe post-thaw frosts. Fertile soils with high N levels and an overall water surplus support deciduous leaf turnover. Fires are uncommon.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Cool temperate Europe (southwest Russia to British Isles), northeast Asia (northeast China, southern Siberia Korea, and Japan), and northeast America. Limited occurrences in warm-temperate zones of south Europe and Asia and the Midwest USA.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Röhrig E, Ulrich B (1991) Temperate deciduous forests. Ecosystems of the world. Vol. 7. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
* Box EO, Fujiwara K (2015) Warm temperate deciduous forests. Springer, Cham.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
