---
name: T2.3 Oceanic cool temperate rainforests
biome: T2. Temperate-boreal forests and woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T2.3
biomecode: T2
contributors: DA Keith, SK Wiser, N Brummit, F Essl, MS McGlone, D Faber-Langendoen
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Broadleaf and needleleaf rainforests in cool temperate climates have evergreen or semi-deciduous tree canopies with high LAI and mostly nanophyll-microphyll foliage. Productivity is moderate to high and constrained by strongly seasonal growth and reproductive phenology and moderate levels of frost tolerance. SLA may be high but lower than in T2.2. Evergreen trees typically dominate, but deciduous species become more abundant in sites prone to severe frost and/or with high soil fertility and moisture surplus. The smaller range of leaf sizes and SLA, varied phenology, frost tolerance, broader edaphic association, and wetter, cooler climate distinguish these forests from warm temperate forests (T2.4). Local or regional endemism is significant in many taxa. Nonetheless, energy sources are primarily autochthonous. Trophic networks are less complex than in other cool-temperate or boreal forests (T2.1 and T2.2), with weaker top-down regulation due to the lower diversity and abundance of large herbivores and predators. Tree diversity is low (usually <8–10 spp./ha), with abundant epiphytic and terrestrial bryophytes, pteridophytes, lichens, a modest range of herbs, and conspicuous fungi, which are important decomposers. The vertebrate fauna is mostly sedentary and of low-moderate diversity. Most plants recruit in the shade and some remain in seedling banks until gap-phase dynamics are driven by individual tree-fall, lightning strikes, or by extreme wind storms in some areas. Tree recruitment varies with tree masting events, which strongly influence trophic dynamics, especially of rodents and their predators.

# Ecological Drivers

There is a large water surplus, rarely with summer deficits. Rainfall is seasonal, borne on westerly winds peaking in winter months and inter-annual variability is relatively low. Cool winters (minima typically <0–5°C for 3 months) limit the duration of the growing season. Maritime air masses are the major supply of climatic moisture and moderate winters and summer temperatures. Light may be limited in winter by frequent cloud cover and high latitude. Intermittent winter snow does not persist for more than a few days or weeks. Soils are moderately fertile to infertile and may accumulate peat. Exposure to winter storms and landslides leaves imprints on forest structure in some regions. Fires are rare, occurring on century time scales when lightning (or human) ignitions follow extended droughts.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Cool temperate coasts of Chile and Patagonia, New Zealand, Tasmania and the Pacific Northwest, rarely extending to warm-temperate latitudes on mountains in Chile, southeast Australia, and outliers above 2,500-m elevation in the New Guinea highlands. Some authors extend the concept to wet boreal forests on the coasts of northwest Europe, Japan, and northeast Canada.

{% capture map_det %}
Cool temperate and boreal rainforest regions identified by DellaSala et al. (2011) matched with ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) to map major occurrences, proofed by expert appraisal. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* DallaSala DA, Alaback P, Spribille T, von Wehrden H, Nauman RS (2011) Just what are temperate and boreal rainforests? In: Temperate and boreal rainforests of the world: ecology and conservation (Ed. DA DellaSala), pp1-41. Island Press, Washington DC.
* McGlone MS, Buitenwerf R, Richardson SJ (2016) The formation of the oceanic temperate forests of New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Botany. 54:128-155.
* McGlone MS, Lusk CH, Armesto JJ (2016) Biogeography and ecology of south-temperate forests. New Zealand Journal of Botany 54: 94-99.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
