---
name: T2.4 Warm temperate rainforests
biome: T2 Temperate-boreal forests & woodlands
realm: Terrestrial
code: T2.4
biomecode: T2
contributors: DA Keith / NA Brummit / D Faber-Langendoen
---

# Ecological traits

 Relatively productive but structurally simple closed-canopy forests with high LAI occur in humid warm temperate climates. The tree canopies are more uniform than most tropical forests (T1.1, T1.2) and lack large emergents. Their foliage is relatively leathery with intermediate SLA values, notophyll-microphyll leaf sizes and overwhelmingly evergreen, but deciduous species are sometimes scattered within the forest canopies. Energy sources are autochthonous and primary productivity is relatively high, but weakly limited by summer drought and sometimes by acid substrates. Forest function is regulated primarily by bottom-up processes related to resource competition, rather than top-down trophic processes or disturbance regimes. Trophic structure is simpler than in tropical forests, with moderate levels of diversity and endemism among most major taxa (e.g. typically less than 20 tree species per hectare), but local assemblages of birds, bats and canopy invertebrates may be abundant and quite species-rich, and play important roles in pollination and seed dispersal. Canopy insects are the major consumers of primary production and a major food source for birds, whereas decomposers and detritivores such as invertebrates, fungi and microbes on the forest floor are critical to nutrient cycling. Vertebrate herbivores are relatively uncommon and generally there is low-moderate diversity of mammals. Although epiphytes and lianes are present, plant life form traits that are typical of tropical forests (T1.1, T1.2) such as buttress roots, compound leaves, monopodial growth and cauliflory are uncommon or absent in warm temperate rainforests. Some trees have ecophysiological tolerance of acid soils (e.g. through Al accumulation). Gap-phase dynamics is driven by individual tree-fall and lightning strikes, but many trees are shade-tolerant and recruit slowly in the absence of disturbance. Ground vegetation includes a variety of growth forms but few grasses.

# Key-ecological-drivers

The environmental niche of these forests is defined by a modest overall water surplus with no distinct dry season, albeit moderate summer water deficits in some years. Mean annual rainfall is typically 1200-2500 mm, but topographic mesoclimates (sheltered gullies, orographic processes) sustain reliable moisture at some sites. Temperatures are mild with moderate seasonality and a growing season of 6-8 months, and frosts are rare. Substrates may be acidic with high levels of Al and Fe that limit uptake of nutrients. These forests are typically not flammable due to their moist microclimates, but may be embedded in fire-prone landscapes.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Patchy warm temperate distribution 26-43° latitude, north or south of the Equator (east Asia, southeast Australia, New Zealand, southeast USA, Mexico, central Chile, South Africa and the Azores).

{% capture map_det %} Terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (https://www.worldwildlife.org/biome-categories/terrestrial-ecoregions), global and regional reviews (cited in respective reference sections of profiles), maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts. {% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References

### Text references

* Grubb PJ, Bellingham PJ, Kohyama TS, Piper FS Valido A (2013) Disturbance regimes, gap-demanding trees and seed mass related to tree height in warm temperate rain forests worldwide. Biol. Rev. 88: 701–744. doi: 10.1111/brv.12029.
* Mucina L (2018) Vegetation survey and classification of subtropical forests of southern Africa. Springer, Cham.

### Map References

* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm, BioScience 67: 534–545.
