---
name: T2.6 Temperate pyric sclerophyll forests and woodlands
biome: T2. Temperate-boreal forests and woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T2.6
biomecode: T2
contributors: DA Keith, F Essl, J Franklin, R Mac Nally
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Forests and woodlands, typically 10–30-m tall with an open evergreen sclerophyllous tree canopy and low-moderate LAI grow in fire-prone temperate landscapes. Productivity is lower than other temperate and tropical forest systems, limited by low nutrient availability and summer water deficits. Abundant light and water (except in peak summer) enable the development of substantial biomass with high C:N ratios. Trees have microphyll foliage with low to very low SLA. Sclerophyll or subsclerophyll shrubs with low to very low SLA foliage form a prominent layer between the trees. A sparse ground layer of C3 and C4 tussock grasses and forbs becomes more prominent on soils of loamy texture. Diversity and local endemism may be high among some taxa including plants, birds, and some invertebrates such as dipterans and hemipterans. Low nutrients and summer droughts limit the diversity and abundance of higher trophic levels. Plant traits (e.g. sclerophylly, stomatal invagination, tubers, and seedbanks) confer tolerance to pronounced but variable summer water deficits. Plants possess traits that promote the efficient capture and retention of nutrients, including specialised root structures, N-fixing bacterial associations, slow leaf turnover, and high allocation of photosynthates to structural tissues and exudates. Consumers have traits that enable the consumption of high-fibre biomass. Mammalian herbivores (e.g. the folivorous koala) can exploit high-fibre content and phenolics. Plants and animals have morphological and behavioural traits that allow tolerance or avoidance of fire and the life-history processes of many taxa are cued to fire (especially plant recruitment). Key fire traits in plants include recovery organs protected by thick bark or burial, serotinous seedbanks (i.e. held in plant canopies), physical and physiological seed dormancy and pyrogenic reproduction. Almost all plants are shade-intolerant and fire is a critical top-down regulator of diversity through storage effects and the periodic disruption of plant competition.

# Ecological Drivers

Hot summers generate a marked but variable summer water deficit, usually with a modest winter surplus, irrespective of whether rainfall is highly seasonal with winter maximum, aseasonal, or weakly seasonal with inter-annually variable summer maxima. Soils are acidic, sandy, or loamy in texture, and low to very impoverished in P and N. Hot summers define a marked season for canopy or surface fires at decadal to multi-decadal intervals. Light frost occurs periodically in some areas but snow is rare.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Temperate regions of Australia, the Mediterranean, and central California.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Barbour M, Keeler-Wolf  T, Schoenherr AA (2007) Terrestrial vegetation of California. 3rd edition. University of California Press, Berkeley.
* Tozer MG, Simpson CC, Jansens IB, Keith DA (2017) Biogeography of Australia’s dry sclerophyll forests: drought, nutrients and fire. In: Australian vegetation. (Ed. DA Keith), pp314-338. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
