---
name: T3.1 Seasonally dry tropical shrublands
biome: T3. Shrublands and shrubby woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T3.1
biomecode: T3
contributors: DA Keith, J Russell-Smith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These moderate-productivity, mostly evergreen shrublands, shrubby grasslands and low, open forests (generally <6-m tall) are limited by nutritional poverty and strong seasonal drought in the tropical winter months. Taxonomic and functional diversity is moderate in most groups but with high local endemism in plants, invertebrates, birds, and other taxa. Vegetation is spatially heterogeneous in a matrix of savannas (T4.2) or tropical dry forests (T1.2) and dominated by sclerophyllous shrubs with small leaf sizes (nanophyll-microphyll) and low SLA. C4 grasses may be conspicuous or co-dominant (unlike in most temperate heathlands, T3.2) but generally do not form a continuous stratum as in savannas (biome T4). These systems have relatively simple trophic networks fuelled by autochthonous energy sources. Productivity is low to moderate and constrained by seasonal drought and nutritional poverty. Shrubs are the dominant primary producers and show traits promoting the capture and conservation of nutrients (e.g. sclerophylly, cluster roots, carnivorous structures, and microbial and fungal root mutualisms) and tolerance to severe seasonal droughts (e.g. stomatal invagination). Nectarivorous and/or insectivorous birds and reptiles and granivorous small mammals dominate the vertebrate fauna, but vertebrate herbivores are sparse. Recurring fires play a role in the top-down regulation of ecosystem structure and composition.

# Ecological Drivers

A severe seasonal climatic water deficit during tropical winter months is exacerbated by sandy or shallow rocky substrates with low moisture retention. Nutritional poverty (especially N and P) stems from oligotrophic, typically acid substrates such as sandstones, ironstones, leached sand deposits, or rocky volcanic or ultramafic substrates. Vegetation holds the largest pool of nutrients. Temperatures are warm, rarely <10°C, with low diurnal and seasonal variation. Dry-season fires recur on decadal or longer time scales, but they are rare in table-top mountains (tepui).

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Brazilian campos rupestres (where grasses are important), Venezuelan tepui, Peruvian tabletops, Florida sands, and scattered in northern Australia and montane oceanic islands.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Fernandes GW (2016) Ecology and conservation of mountaintop grasslands in Brazil (Springer: Berlin)
* Morellato LPC, Silveira.FAO (2018) Plant life in campo rupestre: New lessons from an ancient biodiversity hotspot. Flora 238: 1-10.
* Russell-Smith J, Ryan PG, Klessa D, Waight G, Harwood R (1998) Fire regimes, fire-sensitive vegetation, and fire management of the sandstone Arnhem Plateau, monsoonal northern Australia. Journal of Applied Ecology 35, 829-846.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
