---
name: T3.2 Seasonally dry temperate heath and shrublands
biome: T3. Shrublands and shrubby woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T3.2
biomecode: T3
contributors: DA Keith, J Loidi
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Sclerophyllous, evergreen shrublands are distinctive ecosystems of humid and subhumid climates in mid-latitudes. Their low-moderate productivity is fuelled by autochthonous energy sources and is limited by resource constraints and/or recurring disturbance. Vegetation is dominated by shrubs with very low SLA, high C:N ratios, shade-intolerance, and long-lived, small, often ericoid leaves, sometimes with a low, open canopy of sclerophyll trees. The ground layer may include geophytes and sclerophyll graminoids, though less commonly true grasses. Trophic webs are simple, with large mammalian predators scarce or absent, and low densities of vertebrate herbivores. Native browsers may have local effects on vegetation. Diversity and local endemism may be high among vascular plants and invertebrate consumers. Plants and animals have morphological, ecophysiological, and life-history traits that promote persistence under summer droughts, nutrient poverty, and recurring fires, which play a role in top-down regulation. Stomatal regulation and root architecture promote drought tolerance in plants. Cluster roots and acid exudates, mycorrhizae, and insectivory promote nutrient capture, while cellulose, lignin, exudate production, and leaf longevity promote nutrient conservation in plants. Vertebrate herbivores and granivores possess specialised dietary and digestive traits enabling consumption of foliage with low nutrient content and secondary compounds. Slow decomposition rates are slow, allowing litter-fuel accumulation to add to well-aerated fine fuels in shrub canopies. Life-history traits such as recovery organs, serotiny, post-fire seedling recruitment, pyrogenic flowering, and fire-related germination cues promote plant survival, growth, and reproduction under recurring canopy fires. Animals evade fires in burrows or through mobility. Animal pollination syndromes are common (notably dipterans, lepidopterans, birds, and sometimes mammals) and ants may be prominent in seed dispersal.

# Ecological Drivers

A marked summer water deficit and a modest winter surplus is driven by high summer temperatures and evapotranspiration with winter-maximum or aseasonal rainfall patterns. Winters are mild, or cool at high elevations. Sandy soil textures or reverse-texture effects of clay-loams exacerbate an overall water deficit. Soils are typically acid, derived from siliceous sand deposits, sandstones, or acid intrusives or volcanics, and are low to very low in P, N, and mineral cations (though this varies between regions, e.g, base-rich limestones, marl and dolomites in southern Europe). The climate, soils, and vegetation promote summer canopy fires at decadal to multi-decadal intervals. Positive feedbacks between fire and vegetation may be important in maintaining flammability.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mediterranean-type climate regions of Europe, north and south Africa, southern Australia, western North and South America, and occurrences in non-Mediterranean climates in eastern Australia, the USA, and Argentina.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Keeley JE, Bond WJ, Bradstock RA, Pausas, JG, Rundel PW (2012) Fire in Mediterranean Ecosystems: ecology, evolution and management. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
* Lamont BB, Keith DA (2017) Heathlands and associated shrublands. In: Australian vegetation. D. A. Keith. Editor, pp339-368. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
