---
name: T3.3 Cool temperate heathlands
biome: T3. Shrublands and shrubby woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T3.3
biomecode: T3
contributors: DA Keith, F Essl, NA Brummitt, J Loidi
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-07-03 13:27:55
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These mixed graminoid shrublands are restricted to cool-temperate maritime environments. Typically, the vegetation cover is >70% and mostly less than 1-m tall, dominated by low, semi-sclerophyllous shrubs with ferns and C3 graminoids. Shrub foliage is mostly evergreen and ericoid, with low SLA or reduced to spiny stems. Modular growth forms are common among shrubs and grasses. Diversity and local endemism are low across taxa and the trophic network is relatively simple. Primary productivity is low, based on autochthonous energy sources and limited by cold temperatures and low-fertility acid soils rather than by water deficit (as in other heathlands, T3). Seasonally low light may limit productivity at the highest latitudes. Cool temperatures and low soil oxygen due to periodically wet subsoil limit decomposition by microbes and fungi so that soils accumulate organic matter despite low productivity. Mammalian browsers including cervids, lagomorphs, and camelids (South America) consume local plant biomass but subsidise autochthonous energy with carbon and nutrients consumed in more productive forest or anthropogenic ecosystems adjacent to the heathlands. Browsers and recurring low-intensity fires appear to be important in top-down regulatory processes that prevent the transition to forest, as is anthropogenic fire, grazing, and tree removal. Canids and raptors are the main vertebrate predators. Other characteristic vertebrate fauna include ground-nesting birds and rodents. At least some communities exhibit autogenic cyclical patch dynamics in which shrubs and grasses are alternately dominant, senescent, and regenerating. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Unlike most other heathlands, these ecosystems have an overall water surplus, though sometimes with small summer deficits. Mild summers and cold winters with periodic snow are tempered by maritime climatic influences. A short day length and low solar angle limits energy influx at the highest latitudes. Severe coastal storms with high winds occur periodically. Acid soils, typically with high humic content in upper horizons, are often limited in N and P. Low-intensity fires recur at decadal time scales or rarely. Some northern European heaths were derived from forest and return to forest when burning and grazing ceases.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Boreal and cool temperate coasts of western Europe and America, the Azores, and the Magellanic region of South America, mostly at >40° latitude, except where transitional with warm-temperate heaths (e.g. France and Spain).

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014; Latifovic et al. 2016), then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution (Dinerstein et al. 2017; CEC 1997). Ecoregions were selected if they contained areas mentioned or mapped in published regional studies (Loidi et al. 2015; Luebert & Pliscoff 2017), or if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Aerts R, Heil GW (1993) Heathlands: patterns and processes in a changing environment. Kluwer Academic Publishing.
* Loidi J, Biurrun I, Juan Antonio Campos JA, García-Mijangos I, Herrera M (2010) A biogeographical analysis of the European Atlantic lowland heathlands. Journal of Vegetation Science 21: 832–842.
* Watt AS (1947) Pattern and process in the plant community. Journal of Ecology 

### Map References
* Ecological Regions of North America--Toward a Common Perspective;  Commission for Environmental Cooperation; Montréal, Québec, Canada; 1997. [PDF](http://www3.cec.org/islandora/en/item/1701-ecological-regions-north-america-toward-common-perspective-en.pdf)
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Latifovic, R., Homer, C., Ressl, R., Pouliot, D., Hossain, S.N., Colditz, R.R., Olthof, I., Giri, C., Victoria, A., 2016. North American land change monitoring system. In: Giri, C., (Ed), Remote Sensing of Land Use and Land Cover: Principles and Applications, CRC-Press, pp. 303-324. DOI: [10.1201/b11964](https://doi.org/10.1201/b11964)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
