---
name: T3.4 Young rocky pavements, lava flows and screes
biome: T3. Shrublands and shrubby woodlands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T3.4
biomecode: T3
contributors: DA Keith, NA Cutler
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:00:32
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Vegetation dominated by cryptogams (lichens, bryophytes) develops on skeletal rocky substrates and may have scattered shrubs with very low LAI. These low-productivity systems are limited by moisture and nutrient scarcity, temperature extremes, and periodic disturbance through mass movement. Diversity and endemism is low across taxa and the trophic structure is simple. Reptiles and ground-nesting birds are among the few resident vertebrates. Lichens and bryophytes may be abundant and perform critical roles in moisture retention, nutrient acquisition, energy capture, surface stabilisation, and proto-soil development, especially through carbon accumulation. N-fixing lichens and cyanobacteria, nurse plants, and other mutualisms are critical to ecosystem development. Rates of ecosystem development are linked to substrate weathering, decomposition, and soil development, which mediate nutrient supply, moisture retention, and temperature amelioration. Vascular plants have nanophyll-microphyll leaves and low SLA. Their cover is sparse and comprises ruderal pioneer species (shrubs, grasses, and forbs) that colonise exposed surfaces and extract moisture from rock crevices. Species composition and vegetation structure are dynamic in response to surface instability and show limited differentiation across environmental gradients and microsites due to successional development, episodes of desiccation, and periodic disturbances that destroy biomass. Rates of vegetation development, soil accumulation, and compositional change display amplified temperature-dependence due to resource-concentration effects. Older rocky systems have greater micro-habitat diversity, more insular biota, and higher endemism and are classified in other functional groups.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Skeletal substrates (e.g. lava pavements, scree slopes, and rock outcrops) limit water retention and nutrient capital and increase heat absorption, leading to periodically extreme temperatures. High summer temperatures and solar exposure concentrate resources and increase the temperature-sensitivity of biogeochemical processes. Winter temperatures may be cold at high elevations (see T6.2). Recurring geophysical disturbances such as lava flow, mass movement, and geothermal activity as well as desiccation episodes periodically destroy biomass and reset successional pathways.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Localised areas scattered around the Pacific Rim, African Rift Valley, Mediterranean and north Atlantic.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Anderson-Teixeira KJ, Vitousek PM, Brown JH (2007) Amplified temperature dependence in ecosystems developing on the lava flows of Mauna Loa, Hawai’i. PNAS 105: 228-233.
* Crews TE, Kurina, LM, Vitousek PM (2001) Organic matter and nitrogen accumulation and nitrogen fixation during early ecosystem development in Hawaii. Biogeochemistry 52: 259-279.
* Cutler NA, Belyea LR, Dugmore AJ (2008) The spatiotemporal dynamics of a primary succession. Journal of Ecology 96: 231-246.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
