---
name: T4.1 Trophic savannas
biome: T4 Savannas and grasslands
realm: Terrestrial
code: T4.1
biomecode: T4
contributors: CER Lehmann / DA Keith
---

# Ecological traits

These grassy woodlands and grasslands are dominated by C4 stoloniferous, rhizomatous and tussock grasses that are kept short by vertebrate grazers. Trophic savannas, relative to pyric savannas (T4.2), have unique plant and animal diversity within a complex trophic structure dominated by abundant mammalian herbivores and predators. These animals are functionally differentiated in body size, mouth morphology, diet and behaviour. They promote fine-scale vegetation heterogeneity and dominance of short grass species, sustaining the system through positive feedbacks and limiting fire fuels. Trees and grasses possess functional traits that promote tolerance of chronic herbivory, as well as seasonal drought. Seasonally high productivity coincides with summer rains. The dry season induces grass curing and leaf fall in deciduous and semi-deciduous woody plants. Trees are shade-intolerant during establishment. and most develop chemical (e.g. phenolics) or physical (e.g. spinescence) herbivory defence traits and an ability to resprout as they enter the juvenile phase. Their soft microphyll-notophyll foliage has relatively high SLA and low C

# Key-ecological-drivers

Trophic savannas like pyric savannas are driven by seasonal climates, but generally occupy environmental niches with lower rainfall and higher soil fertility. A high annual rainfall deficit of 400mm to more than 1800mm. Annual rainfall generally varies from 300mm to 700mm, always with strong seasonal (winter) drought, but these savanna types are restricted to landscapes with sufficient water bodies (rivers, lakes) to sustain high densities of large mammals. Temperatures are warm-hot with low-moderate variability through the year. Low intensity fires have return intervals of 5-50 years, depending on animal densities and inter-annual rainfall variation, usually after the growing season, removing much of the remaining biomass not consumed by herbivores. Soils are moderately fertile and often have a significant clay component.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Seasonal tropics and subtropics of Africa and Asia.

{% capture map_det %} Terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (https://www.worldwildlife.org/biome-categories/terrestrial-ecoregions), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts. {% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References

### Text references

* Archibald S, Hempson GP (2016) Competing consumers: contrasting the patterns and impacts of fire and mammalian herbivory in Africa. Phil Trans R Soc B. 371: 20150309.
* Hempson GP, Archibald S, Bond WJ, Ellis RP, Grant CC, Kruger FJ, et al. (2015) Ecology of grazing lawns in Africa. Biological Reviews 90: 979–994.

### Map References

* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm, BioScience 67: 534–545.
