---
name: T4.2 Pyric tussock savannas
biome: T4 Savannas and grasslands
realm: Terrestrial
code: T4.2
biomecode: T4
contributors: CER Lehmann / A Etter / DA Keith
---

# Ecological traits

 Grassy woodlands and grasslands are dominated by C4 tussock grasses, with some C3 grasses in the Americas and variable tree cover. In the tropics, seasonally high productivity coincides with timing of ‘summer’ rains and grasses ‘cure’ in dry winters, promoting flammability. This pattern also occurs in the subtropics, but transitions occur with temperate woodlands (T4.4), which have different seasonal phenology, tree and grass dominance and fire regimes. Tree basal area, abundance of plants with annual semelparous life cycles and grasses with tall tussock growth forms are strongly dependent on mean annual rainfall (i.e. limited by seasonal drought). Local endemism quite is low across all taxa, but regional endemism is high, especially in the Americas and Australasia. Plant traits such as deciduous leaf phenology or deep roots promote tolerance of seasonal drought and rapid resource exploitation. Woody plants have microphyll-notophyll foliage with moderate-high SLA and high C:N ratios. Nitrogen volatilisation exceeds deposition because fire is the major consumer of biomass. Woody plant species are shade-intolerant during establishment and develop fire-resistant organs (e.g. thick bark, below-ground bud banks). The contiguous ground layer of erect tussock grasses creates an aerated flammable fuel bed while grass architecture with tightly clustered culms, vent heat away from meristems. Patchy fires promotes landscape-scale vegetation heterogeneity (e.g. in tree cover), and maintains dominance of flammable tussock grasses over shrubs, especially in wetter climates, and hence sustains the system through positive feedbacks.  Fires also enhance efficiency of predators. Vertebrate scavengers and invertebrate detritivores are key components of the trophic network and carbon cycle. Mammalian herbivores and predators are present, but exert less top-down influence on the diverse trophic structure than fire. Consequently, plant physical defences against herbivores, such as spinescence are less prominent than in T4.1.

# Key-ecological-drivers

An overall rainfall deficit up to c. 1200mm or a modest surplus of up to 500mm, always has a strong seasonal (winter) drought with continuously warm-hot temperatures through the year. Mean annual rainfall varies mainly from 650mm to 1500mm. Subdecadal fire regimes of surface fires occur throughout the dry season, while canopy fires occur rarely late in the dry season. Soils are of low-moderate fertility, often with high Fe and Al.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Seasonally dry tropics and subtropics of the Americas, Australia, Asia and Africa.

{% capture map_det %}  {% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

Terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (https://www.worldwildlife.org/biome-categories/terrestrial-ecoregions), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts.

## References
### Text references
* Furley PA (1999) The nature and diversity of neotropical savanna vegetation with particular reference to the Brazilian cerrados. Global Ecology and Biogeography 8, 223-241. / Lehmann CER, Anderson TM, Sankaran M, Higgins SI, Archibald S, Hoffmann WA, et al. (2014). Savanna vegetation-fire-climate relationships differ among continents. Science 343, 548-552.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm, BioScience 67: 534–545.
