---
name: T4.3 Hummock savannas
biome: T4. Savannas and grasslands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T4.3
biomecode: T4
contributors: DA Keith, RJ Williams
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:03:18
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These open woodlands are dominated by C4 hummock grasses (C3 and stoloniferous grasses are absent) with sclerophyllous trees and shrubs. Their primary productivity is lower and less regularly seasonal than in other savannas of the subtropics (T4.1 and T4.2), but the seasonal peak nonetheless coincides with summer monsoonal rains. Plant traits promote tolerance to seasonal drought, including reduced leaf surfaces, thick cuticles, sunken stomata, and deep root architecture to access subsoil moisture. Deciduous leaf phenology is less common than in other savannas, likely due to selection pressure for nutrient conservation associated with oligotrophic substrates. A major feature distinguishing this group of savannas from others is its ground layer of slow-growing sclerophyllous, spiny, domed hummock grasses interspersed with bare ground. Woody biomass and LAI decline along rainfall gradients. Sclerophyll shrubs and trees are shade-intolerant during establishment and most possess fire-resistant organs (e.g. thick bark, epicormic meristematic tissues, and below-ground bud banks). Their notophyll foliage and that of hummock grasses have low SLA and mostly high C:N ratios, although N may be elevated in rubisco-enriched C4 grasses. Trophic structure is therefore simpler than in other savannas. Mammalian herbivores and their predators are present in low densities, but fire and invertebrates are the major biomass consumers. Fire promotes landscape-scale vegetation heterogeneity but occurs less frequently than in other savannas due to slow recovery of perennial hummock grass fuels. Nitrogen volatilisation exceeds deposition due to recurring fires. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Large overall rainfall deficit up to ~2,000 mm, always with a seasonal (winter) drought, but in drier areas seasonality is weaker than in other savanna groups. Mean annual rainfall is generally 400–1,000 mm. Climatic water deficit is exacerbated by coarse-textured, usually shallow, rocky soils. These are characteristically infertile. Temperatures are warm-hot with moderate seasonal and diurnal variability. Fires promoted by flammable hummocks may consume the low tree canopies and occur at variable decadal intervals any time when it is dry, but fire spread depends on ground fuel continuity which is limited by rainfall and rocky terrain.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Rocky areas of the seasonal Australian tropics, extending to the semi-arid zone.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al. 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Lehmann CER, Anderson TM, Sankaran M, Higgins SI, Archibald S, Hoffmann WA, et al. (2014). *Savanna vegetation-fire-climate relationships differ among continents*. **Science** 343, 548-552. 
* Williams RJ, Cook GD, Liedloff AC, Bond WJ (2017) Australia's tropical savannas: vast ancient and rich landscapes. In: Australian vegetation (Ed. DA Keith), pp368-388. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
