---
name: T4.4 Temperate woodlands
biome: T4. Savannas and grasslands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T4.4
biomecode: T4
contributors: DA Keith, D Faber-Langendoen, J Franklin
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These structurally simple woodlands are characterised by space between open tree crowns and a ground layer with tussock grasses, interstitial forbs, and a variable shrub component. Grasses with C3 and C4 photosynthetic pathways are common, but C4 grasses may be absent from the coldest and wettest sites or where rain rarely falls in the summer. In any given area, C4 grasses are most abundant in summer or on dry sites or areas with summer-dominant rainfall, while C3 grasses predominate in winter, locally moist sites, cold sites, or areas without summer rainfall. The ground flora also varies inter-annually depending on rainfall. Trees generate spatial heterogeneity in light, water, and nutrients, which underpin a diversity of microhabitats and mediate competitive interactions among plants in the ground layer. Foliage is mostly microphyll and evergreen (but transmitting abundant light) or deciduous in colder climates. Diversity of plant and invertebrate groups may therefore be relatively high at local scales, but local endemism is limited due to long-distance dispersal. Productivity is relatively high as grasses rapidly produce biomass rich in N and other nutrients after rains. This sustains a relatively complex trophic network of invertebrate and vertebrate consumers. Large herbivores and their predators are important top-down regulators. Bioturbation by fossorial mammals influences soil structure, water infiltration, and nutrient cycling. The fauna is less functionally and taxonomically diverse than in most tropical savannas (T4.1 and T4.2), but includes large and small mammals, reptiles, and a high diversity of birds and macro-invertebrates, including grasshoppers, which are major consumers of biomass. Plants and animals tolerate and persist through periodic ground fires that consume cured-grass fuels, but few have specialised traits cued to fire (cf. pyric ecosystems such as T2.6).

# Ecological Drivers

A water deficit occurs seasonally in summer, driven primarily by peak evapotranspiration under warm-hot temperatures and, in some regions, seasonal (winter-maximum) rainfall patterns. Mean annual rainfall is 350–1,000 mm. Low winter temperatures and occasional frost and snow may limit the growing season to 6–9 months. Soils are usually fine-textured and fertile, but N may be limiting in some areas. Fires burn mostly in the ground layers during the drier summer months at decadal intervals.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Temperate southeast and southwest Australia, Patagonia and Pampas of South America, western and eastern North America, the Mediterranean region, and temperate Eurasia.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Davis FW, Baldocchi D, Tyler C (2016) Oak woodlands. In Ecosystems of California (Eds. HA Mooney, E Zavaleta), pp509-534. University of California Press, Berkeley.
* Gibson GJ (2009) Grasses and grassland ecology. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* Prober SM, Gosper CR, Gilfedder L, Harwood TD, Thiele KR, Williams KJ, Yates CJ (2017) Temperate eucalypt woodlands. In: Australian vegetation (Ed. DA Keith), pp410-437. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
