---
name: T4.5 Temperate subhumid grasslands
biome: T4. Savannas and grasslands biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T4.5
biomecode: T4
contributors: DA Keith, F Essl, DJ Gibson
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Structurally simple tussock grasslands with interstitial forbs occur in subhumid temperate climates. Isolated trees or shrubs may be present in very low densities, but are generally excluded by heavy soil texture, summer drought, winter frost, or recurring summer fires. Unlike tropical savannas (T4.1–T4.3), these systems are characterised by a mixture of both C3 and C4 grasses, with C4 grasses most abundant in summer or on dry sites and C3 grasses predominating in winter or locally moist sites. There are also strong latitudinal gradients, with C3 grasses more dominant towards the poles. Diversity of plant and invertebrate groups may be high at small spatial scales, but local endemism is limited due to long-distance dispersal. Productivity is high as grasses rapidly produce biomass rich in N and other nutrients after rains. This sustains a complex trophic network in which large herbivores and their predators are important top-down regulators. Fossorial mammals are important in bioturbation and nutrient cycling. Mammals are less functionally and taxonomically diverse than in most savannas. Taxonomic affinities vary among regions (e.g. ungulates, cervids, macropods, and camelids), but their life history and dietary traits are convergent. Where grazing is not intense and fire occurs infrequently, leaf litter accumulates from the tussocks, creating a thatch that is important habitat for ground-nesting birds, small mammals, reptiles, and macro-invertebrates, including grasshoppers, which are major consumers of plant biomass. Dense thatch limits productivity. Plant competition plays a major role in structuring the ecosystem and its dynamics, with evidence that it is mediated by resource ratios and stress gradients, herbivory, and fire regimes. Large herbivores and fires both interrupt competition and promote coexistence of tussocks and interstitial forbs.

# Ecological Drivers

A strong seasonal water deficit in summer driven by peak evapotranspiration under warm-hot temperatures, despite an unseasonal or weakly seasonal rainfall pattern. Mean annual rainfall varies from 250 mm to 750 mm. Cold winter temperatures limit the growing season to 5–7 months, with frost and snow frequent in continental locations. Summers are warm. Soils are deep, fertile and organic and usually fine-textured. Fires ignited by lightning occur in the drier summer months at sub-decadal or decadal intervals.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Subhumid and semi-arid regions of western Eurasia, northeast Asia, Midwest North America, Patagonia and Pampas regions of South America, southeast Africa, southeast Australia, and southern New Zealand.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Gibson GJ (2009) Grasses and grassland ecology. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
