---
name: T5.2 Succulent or Thorny deserts and semi-deserts
biome: T5. Deserts and semi-deserts biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T5.2
biomecode: T5
contributors: MG Tozer, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These deserts are characterised by long-lived perennial plants, many with spines and/or succulent stem tissues or leaves. Local endemism is prominent among plants and animals. Productivity is low but relatively consistent through time and limited by precipitation and extreme summer temperatures. Vegetation cover is sparse to moderate (10–30%) and up to several metres tall. Dominant plants are stress-tolerators with slow growth and reproduction, many exhibiting CAM physiology and traits that promote water capture, conservation, and storage. These include deep root systems, suffrutescence, plastic growth and reproduction, succulent stems and/or foliage, thickened cuticles, sunken stomata, and deciduous or reduced foliage. Spinescence in many species is likely a physical defence to protect moist tissues from herbivores. Annuals and geophytes constitute a variable proportion of the flora exhibiting rapid population growth or flowering responses to semi-irregular rainfall events, which stimulate germination of soil seed banks or growth from dormant subterranean organs. Mammalian, reptilian, and invertebrate faunas are diverse, with avian fauna less well represented. Faunal traits adaptive to drought and heat tolerance include physiological mechanisms (e.g. specialised kidney function and reduced metabolic rates) and behavioural characters (e.g. nocturnal habit and burrow dwelling). Many reptiles and invertebrates have ruderal life histories, but fewer mammals and birds do. Larger ungulate fauna exhibit flexible diets and forage over large areas. Predators are present in low densities due to the low productivity of prey populations.

# Ecological Drivers

These systems occur in subtropical arid climates with large overall water deficits. Precipitation is 5–20% of potential evapotranspiration, but exhibits low inter-annual variability relative to other desert systems. Inter-annual pulses of surplus are infrequent and atmospheric moisture from fogs may contribute significantly to available water. Temperatures are hot with relatively large diurnal ranges, but seasonal variation is less than in other deserts, with very hot summers and mild winters. Substrates are stony and produce soils of moderate to low fertility. Thorny deserts are generally not fire-prone.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mostly subtropical latitudes in the Americas, southern Africa, and southern Asia.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Shmida A, Evenari M, Noy-Meir I (1986) Hot desert ecosystems: an integrated view.  In: Hot deserts and arid shrublands. (Eds. M Evenari, I Noy Meir, DW Goodall), pp. 379-387. Ecosystems of the World, Vol. 12b. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
