---
name: T5.3 Sclerophyll hot deserts and semi-deserts
biome: T5. Deserts and semi-deserts biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T5.3
biomecode: T5
contributors: MG Tozer, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:33:10
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Arid systems dominated by hard-leaved (sclerophyll) vegetation have relatively high diversity and local endemism, notably among plants, reptiles, and small mammals. Large moisture deficits and extremely low levels of soil nutrients limit productivity, however, infrequent episodes of high rainfall drive spikes of productivity and boom-bust ecology. Spatial heterogeneity is also critical in sustaining diversity by promoting niche diversity and resource-rich refuges during ‘bust’ intervals. Stress-tolerator and ruderal life-history types are strongly represented in both flora and fauna. Perennial, long-lived, slow-growing, drought-tolerant, sclerophyll shrubs and hummock (C4) grasses structure the ecosystem by stabilising soils, acting as nutrient-accumulation sites and providing continuously available habitat, shade, and food for fauna. Strong filtering by both nutritional poverty and water deficit promote distinctive scleromorphic and xeromorphic plant traits. They include low SLA, high C:N ratios, reduced foliage, stomatal regulation and encryption, slow growth and reproduction rates, deep root systems, and trait plasticity. Perennial succulents are absent. Episodic rains initiate emergence of a prominent ephemeral flora, with summer and winter rains favouring grasses and forbs, respectively. This productivity ‘boom’ triggers rapid responses by granivores and their predators. Herbivore populations also fluctuate but less so due to ecophysiological traits that promote water conservation. Abundant detritivores support a diverse and abundant resident reptilian and small-mammal fauna. Small mammals and some macro-invertebrates are nocturnal and fossorial, with digging activity contributing to nutrient and carbon cycling, as well as plant recruitment. The abundance and diversity of top predators is low. Nomadism and ground-nesting are well represented in birds. Periodic fires reduce biomass, promote recovery traits in plants (e.g. re-sprouting and fire-cued recruitment) and initiate successional processes in both flora and fauna.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Resource availability is limited by a large overall water deficit (rainfall <250 mm p.a., 5–50% of potential evapotranspiration) and acid sandy soils with very low P and N, together with high diurnal and seasonal variation in temperatures. Summers have runs of extremely hot days (>40°C) and winters have cool nights (0°C), rarely with snow. Long dry spells are punctuated by infrequent inter-annual pulses of water surplus, driving ecological booms and transient periods of fuel continuity. Fires occur at decadal- or century-scale return intervals when lightning or human ignitions coincide with fuel continuity.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Mid-latitudes on sandy substrates of central and northwestern Australia.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Keith DA (2004) Ocean shores to desert dunes: the native vegetation of NSW and the ACT. NSW Department of Environment and Conservation, Sydney.
* Morton S, Stafford Smith DM, Dickman CR, Dunkerley DL, Friedel MH, McAllister RRJ, Reid RW, Roshier DA, Smith MA, Walsh FJ, Wardle GM, Watson IW, Westoby M (2011) A fresh framework for the ecology of arid Australia. Journal of Arid Environments 75: 313-329.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
