---
name: T5.4 Cool deserts and semi-deserts
biome: T5. Deserts and semi-deserts biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T5.4
biomecode: T5
contributors: MG Tozer, DJ Eldridge, D Faber-Langendoen, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

In these arid systems, productivity is limited by both low precipitation and cold temperatures but varies spatially in response to soil texture, salinity, and water table depth. Vegetation cover varies with soil conditions from near zero (on extensive areas of heavily salinized soils or mobile dunes) to >50% in upland grasslands and shrublands, but is generally low in stature (<1 m tall). The dominant plants are perennial C3 grasses and xeromorphic suffrutescent or non-sclerophyllous perennial shrubs. Dwarf shrubs, tending to prostrate or cushion forms occur in areas exposed to strong, cold winds. Plant growth occurs mainly during warming spring temperatures after winter soil moisture recharges. Eurasian winter annuals grow rapidly in this period after developing extensive root systems over winter. Diversity and local endemism are low across all taxa relative to other arid ecosystems. Trophic networks are characterised by large nomadic mammalian herbivores. Vertebrate herbivores including antelopes, equines, camelids, and lagomorphs are important mediators of shrub-grass dynamics, with heavy grazing promoting replacement of grasses by N-fixing shrubs. Grasses become dominant with increasing soil fertility or moisture but may be replaced by shrubs as grazing pressure increases. Fossorial lagomorphs and omnivorous rodents contribute to soil perturbation. Predator populations are sparse but taxonomically diverse. They include raptors, snakes, bears, and cats. Bio-crusts with cyanobacteria, mosses, and lichens are prominent on fine-textured substrates and become dominant where it is too cold for vascular plants. They play critical roles in soil stability and water and nutrient availability.

# Ecological Drivers

Mean annual precipitation is similar to most warm deserts (<250 mm) due to rain shadows and continentality, however, in cool deserts this falls mainly as snow or sleet in winter rather than rain. Evapotranspiration is less severe than in hot deserts, but a substantial water deficit exists due to low precipitation (mostly 10–50% of evapotranspiration) and strong desiccating winds that may occasionally propagate fires. Mean monthly temperatures may fall below −20°C in winter (freezing the soil surface) and exceed 15°C in summer. Substrates vary from stony plains and uplands to extensive dune fields, with mosaics of clay and sandy regolith underpinning landscape-scale heterogeneity. Large regions were submerged below seas or lakes in past geological eras with internal drainage systems leaving significant legacies of salinity in some lowland areas, especially in clay substrates.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Cool temperate plains and plateaus from sea level to 4,000 m elevation in central Eurasia, western North America, and Patagonia. Extreme cold deserts are placed in the polar/alpine biome.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Johnson SL, Kuske CR, Carney TD, Housman DC, Gallegos-Graves LV, Belnap J (2012) Increased temperature and altered summer precipitation have differential effects on biological soil crusts in a dryland ecosystem. Global Change Biology 18: 2583-2593.
* West NE (1983) Comparisons and contrasts between the temperate deserts and semi-deserts of three continents. In:  Ecosystems of the World vol. 5: Temperate deserts and semi-deserts (Ed. NE West). Elsevier, Amsterdam.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
