---
name: T5.5 Hyper-arid deserts
biome: T5. Deserts and semi-deserts biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T5.5
biomecode: T5
contributors: MG Tozer, D Faber-Langendoen, DA Keith
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:36:39
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Hyper-arid deserts show extremely low productivity and biomass and are limited by low precipitation and extreme temperatures. Vegetation cover is very sparse (<1%) and low in stature (typically a few centimetres tall), but productivity and biomass may be marginally greater in topographically complex landscapes within patches of rising ground-water or where runoff accumulates or cloud cover intersects. Trophic networks are simple because autochthonous productivity and allochthonous resources are very limited. Rates of decomposition are slow and driven by microbial activity and UV-B photodegradation, both of which decline with precipitation. Microbial biofilms play important decomposition roles in soils and contain virus lineages that are putatively distinct from other ecosystems. Although diversity is low, endemism may be high because of strong selection pressures and insularity resulting from the large extent of these arid regions and limited dispersal abilities of most organisms. Low densities of drought-tolerant perennial plants (xerophytes) characterise these systems. The few perennials present have very slow growth and tissue turnover rates, low fecundity, generally long life spans, and water acquisition and conservation traits (e.g. extensive root systems, thick cuticles, stomatal regulation, and succulent organs). Ephemeral plants with long-lived soil seed banks are well represented in hyper-arid deserts characterised by episodic rainfall, but they are less common in those that are largely reliant on fog or groundwater. Fauna include both ruderal and drought-tolerant species. Thermoregulation is strongly represented in reptiles and invertebrates. Birds and large mammals are sparse and nomadic, except in areas with reliable standing water. Herbivores and granivores have boom-bust population dynamics coincident with episodic rains.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Extreme rainfall deficit arising from very low rainfall (150 mm to almost zero and <5% of potential evapotranspiration), exacerbated by extremely hot temperatures and desiccating winds. Principal sources of moisture may include moisture-laden fog, irregular inter-annual or decadal rainfall events, and capillary rise from deep water tables. UV-B radiation is extreme except where moderated by fogs. Temperatures exhibit high diurnal and seasonal variability with extreme summer maxima and sub-zero winter night temperatures. Hyper-arid deserts occur on extensive low-relief plains (peneplains) and mountainous terrain. Substrates may be extensive sheets of unstable, shifting sand or stony gibber with no soil profile development and low levels of nutrients. 
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Driest parts of the Sahara-Arabian, Atacama, and Namib deserts in subtropical latitudes.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al. 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al. 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Zablocki O, Adriaenssens EM, Cowan D (2016) Diversity and ecology of viruses in hyperarid desert soils. Applied and Environmental Microbioly 82: 770 –777.
* Rundel P W, Dillon MO, Palma B, Mooney HA, Gulmon SL, Ehleringer JR (1991) The phytogeography and ecology of the coastal Atacama and Peruvian deserts. Aliso 13(1): 2.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
