---
name: T6.1 Ice sheets, glaciers and perennial snowfields
biome: T6. Polar/alpine (cryogenic) biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T6.1
biomecode: T6
contributors: DA Keith, A Terauds, AMB Anesio
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

In these icy systems, extreme cold and periodic blizzards limit productivity and diversity to very low levels, and trophic networks are truncated. Wherever surface or interstitial water is available, life is dominated by micro-organisms including viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and algae, which may arrive by Aeolian processes. Bacterial densities vary from 107 to 1011 cells.L-1. On the surface, the main primary producers are snow (mainly Chlamydomonadales) and ice algae (mainly Zygnematales) with contrasting traits. Metabolic activity is generally restricted to summer months at temperatures close to zero and is enabled by exopolymeric substances, cold-adapted enzymes, cold-shock proteins, and other physiological traits. N-fixing cyanobacteria are critical in the N-cycle, especially in late summer. Surface heterogeneity and dynamism create cryoconite holes, rich oases for microbial life (especially cyanobacteria, prokaryotic heterotrophs and viruses) and active biogeochemical cycling. Most vertebrates are migratory birds with only the emperor penguin over-wintering on Antarctic ice. Mass movement and snow burial also places severe constraints on establishment and persistence of life. Snow and ice algae and cyanobacteria on the surface are ecosystem engineers. Their accumulation of organic matter leads to positive feedbacks between melting and microbial activity that discolours snow and reduces albedo. Organic matter produced at the surface can also be transported through the ice to dark subglacial environments, fuelling microbial processes involving heterotrophic and chemoautotrophic prokaryotes and fungi.

# Ecological Drivers

Permanent but dynamic ice cover accumulates by periodic snow fall and is reduced in summer by melting, sublimation, and calving (i.e. blocks of ice breaking free) in the ablation zone. Slow lateral movement occurs downslope or outwards from ice cap centres with associated cracking. Precipitation may average several metres per year on montane glaciers or less than a few hundred millimetres on extensive ice sheets. Surface temperatures are extremely cold in winter (commonly −60°C in Antarctica) but may rise above 0°C in summer. Desiccating conditions occur during high winds or when water is present almost entirely in solid form. Nutrients, especially N and P, are extremely scarce, the main inputs being glacial moraines, aerosols, and seawater (in sea ice), which may be supplemented locally by guano. Below the ice, temperatures are less extreme, there is greater contact between ice, water, and rock (enhancing nutrient supply), a diminished light intensity, and redox potential tends towards anoxic conditions, depending on hydraulic residence times.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Polar regions and high mountains in the western Americas, central Asia, Europe, and New Zealand, covering ~10% of the earth's surface.

{% capture map_det %}
Areas of permanent snow were identified from consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014), glacier inventories (Raup et al., 2007; GLIMS and NSIDC, 2005-2018) and the Antarctic Land Cover map for 2000 (Hui et al., 2017). A composite map was created at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution in geographic projection, occurrences were then aggregated to half degree spatial resolution and reclassified as major occurrences (cells with > 22% snow coverage) and minor occurrences (cells with at least one occurrence).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Anesio AM, Laybourn-Parry J (2012) *Glaciers and ice sheets as a biome*. **Trends in Ecology and Evolution** 27, 219-225. DOI:[10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.012)
* Anesio AM, Lutz S, Chrismas NAM. Benning LG (2017) The microbiome of glaciers and ice sheets. npj Biofilms Microbiomes 3, 10
### Map References
* GLIMS and NSIDC (2005, updated 2018): Global Land Ice Measurements from Space glacier database.  Compiled and made available by the international GLIMS community and the National Snow and Ice Data Center, Boulder CO, U.S.A.  DOI:10.7265/N5V98602
* Hui, F., J. Kang, Y. Liu, X. Cheng, P. Gong, F. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Ye, and Z. Guo. 2017. *AntarcticaLC2000: The new Antarctic land cover database for the year 2000.* **SCIENCE CHINA Earth Sciences** 60: 686-696. doi: 10.1007/s11430-016-0029-2.
* Raup, B.H.; A. Racoviteanu; S.J.S. Khalsa; C. Helm; R. Armstrong; Y. Arnaud (2007).  "The GLIMS Geospatial Glacier Database: a New Tool for Studying Glacier Change".  Global and Planetary Change 56:101--110. (doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2006.07.018)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
