---
name: T6.2 Polar/alpine cliffs, screes, outcrops and lava flows
biome: T6. Polar/alpine (cryogenic) biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T6.2
biomecode: T6
contributors: DA Keith, A Terauds
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v1.0, 2020-01-20 12:00:00
---
# Ecological Traits
 
Low biomass systems with very low productivity constrained by extreme cold, desiccating winds, skeletal substrates, periodic mass movement and in polar regions by seasonally low light intensity. The dominant life forms are freeze-tolerant crustose lichens, mosses and algae that also tolerate periodic desiccation, invertebrates like tardigrades, nematodes, mites, micro-organisms including viruses, bacteria and protozoa, and nesting birds that forage primarily in other (mostly marine) ecosystems. Diversity and endemism are low, likely due to intense selection pressures and wide dispersal. Trophic networks are simple and truncated. Physiological traits such as cold-adapted enzymes, cold-shock proteins enable metabolic activity, which is restricted to summer months when temperatures are close to or above zero. Nutrient input occurs primarily through substrate weathering, supplemented by guano, which along with cyanobacteria is a major source of N. Mass movement of snow and rock, with accumulation of snow and ice during the intervals, promotes disequilibrium ecosystem dynamics.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Extremely cold winters with wind-chill that may reduce temperatures below -80°C (in Antarctica). In contrast, insolation and heat absorption on rocky substrates may increase summer temperatures substantially above 0°C. Together with the impermeable substrate and intermittently high winds, exposure to summer insolation may produce periods of extreme water deficit punctuated by saturated conditions associated with meltwater and seepage. Periodic burial by snow reduces light availability, while mass movement through landslides, avalanches or volcanic eruptions maintain substrate instability and destroy biomass, limiting the persistence of biota.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Permanently ice-free areas of Antarctica, Greenland, the Arctic circle, and high mountains in the western Americas, central Asia, Europe, Africa and New Zealand.

{% capture map_det %}
Known locations of prominent ice-free rock in glacial and alpine environments where selected from global geographical gazeteers (GeoNames 2020), glacier inventories (Raup et al 2007; GLIMS and NSIDC 2005-2018) and the Antarctic Land Cover map for 2000 (Hui et al. 2017). Further areas with mixed occurrence of barren and snow/ice cover were identified from the Circumpolar Arctic Vegetation Map (Raynolds et al. 2019), the USGS EROS LandCover GLCCDB, version 2 (Loveland et al. 2000)  and a 1km consensus land-cover map (Tuanmu et al. 2014). A composite map was created at 30 seconds spatial resolution in geographic projection, occurrences were then aggregated to half degree spatial resolution and reclassified as major occurrences (cells with at least one known occurrence) and minor occurrences (cells with > 2.5% occurrence of snow/ice cover).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main references
* Chown SL, Clarke A, Fraser CI, Cary SC, Moon KL, McGeoch MA (2015) The changing form of Antarctic Biodiversity. Nature 522: 431-438. 
* Convey P, Stevens PI (2007) Antarctic Biodiversity. Science 317: 1877-1878.  
### Map References
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
* Raup, B.H.; A. Racoviteanu; S.J.S. Khalsa; C. Helm; R. Armstrong; Y. Arnaud (2007).  "The GLIMS Geospatial Glacier Database: a New Tool for Studying Glacier Change".  Global and Planetary Change 56:101--110. (doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2006.07.018)
* GLIMS and NSIDC (2005, updated 2018): Global Land Ice Measurements from Space glacier database.  Compiled and made available by the international GLIMS community and the National Snow and Ice Data Center, Boulder CO, U.S.A.  DOI:10.7265/N5V98602
* Hui, F., J. Kang, Y. Liu, X. Cheng, P. Gong, F. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Ye, and Z. Guo. 2017. *AntarcticaLC2000: The new Antarctic land cover database for the year 2000.* **SCIENCE CHINA Earth Sciences** 60: 686-696. doi: 10.1007/s11430-016-0029-2.
* GeoNames (2020) The GeoNames geographical database. https://www.geonames.org [Accessed in Feb 2020]
* Martha K. Raynolds, Donald A. Walker, Andrew Balser, Christian Bay, Mitch Campbell, Mikhail M. Cherosov, Fred J.A. Daniëls, Pernille Bronken Eidesen, Ksenia A. Ermokhina, Gerald V. Frost, Birgit Jedrzejek, M. Torre Jorgenson, Blair E. Kennedy, Sergei S. Kholod, Igor A. Lavrinenko, Olga V. Lavrinenko, Borgþór Magnússon, Nadezhda V. Matveyeva, Sigmar Metúsalemsson, Lennart Nilsen, Ian Olthof, Igor N. Pospelov, Elena B. Pospelova, Darren Pouliot, Vladimir Razzhivin, Gabriela Schaepman-Strub, Jozef Šibík, Mikhail Yu. Telyatnikov, Elena Troeva (2019) *A raster version of the Circumpolar Arctic Vegetation Map (CAVM)* **Remote Sensing of Environment** 232: 111297, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.111297.
*  Loveland, T.R., Reed, B.C., Brown, J.F., Ohlen, D.O., Zhu, J, Yang, L., and Merchant, J.W., 2000, Development of a Global Land Cover Characteristics Database and IGBP DISCover from 1-km AVHRR Data: International Journal of Remote Sensing, v. 21, no. 6/7, p. 1303-1330.
