---
name: T6.3 Polar tundra and deserts
biome: T6. Polar/alpine (cryogenic) biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T6.3
biomecode: T6
contributors: DA Keith, F Essl, KR Young, CH Körner
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

These low productivity autotrophic ecosystems are limited by winter dormancy during deep winter snow cover, extreme cold temperatures and frost during spring thaw, short growing seasons, desiccating winds, and seasonally low light intensity. Microbial decomposition rates are slow, promoting accumulation of peaty permafrost substrates in which only the surface horizon thaws seasonally. Vegetation is treeless and dominated by a largely continuous cover of cold-tolerant bryophytes, lichens, C3 grasses, sedges, forbs, and dwarf and prostrate shrubs. Tundra around the world, is delimited by the physiological temperature limits of trees, which are excluded where the growing season (i.e. days >0.9°C) is less than 90-94 days duration, with mean temperatures less than 6.5°C across the growing season. In the coldest and/or driest locations, vascular plants are absent and productivity relies on bryophytes, lichens, cyanobacteria, and allochthonous energy sources such as guano. Aestivating insects (i.e. those that lay dormant in hot or dry seasons) dominate the invertebrate fauna. Vertebrate fauna is dominated by migratory birds, some of which travel seasonal routes exceeding several thousand kilometres. Many of these feed in distant wetlands or open oceans. These are critical mobile links that transfer nutrients and organic matter and disperse the propagules of other organisms, both externally on plumage or feet and endogenously. A few mammals in the Northern Hemisphere are hibernating residents or migratory herbivores. Pinnipeds occur in near-coast tundras and may be locally important marine subsidies of nutrients and energy. Predatory canids and polar bears are nomadic or have large home ranges.

# Ecological Drivers

Winters are very cold and dark and summers define short, cool growing seasons with long hours of low daylight. Precipitation falls as snow that persists through winter months. In most areas, there is an overall water surplus, occasionally with small summer deficit, but some areas are ice-free, extremely dry (annual precipitation <150mm p.a.) polar deserts with desiccating winds. Substrates are peaty or gravelly permafrost, which may partially thaw on the surface in summer, causing cryoturbation.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Primarily within the Arctic Circle and adjacent subarctic regions, with smaller occurrences on subantarctic islands and the Antarctic coast.

{% capture map_det %}
Areas corresponding to the tundra climatic zone according to the Köppen-Geiger classification system (Beck et al., 2018) were first identified. Additional areas were then selected in high latitudes corresponding with low annual solar radiation (values <1800 in Beckmann et al., 2014). A union of these maps was created at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution in geographic projection, occurrences were then aggregated to half degree spatial resolution and reclassified cells as major occurrences (>80% of cell area) and minor occurrences (30-80% of cell area).
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Crawford RMM (2013) **Tundra-taiga biology**. Ch 5. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* Paulsen J, Körner C (2014) A climate-based model to predict potential treeline position around the globe. Alpine Botany 124, 1-12
### Map References
* Beck, H., Zimmermann, N., McVicar, T. et al. Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution. Sci Data 5, 180214 (2018). DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2018.214
* Beckmann M., Václavík T., Manceur A.M., Šprtová L., von Wehrden H., Welk E., Cord A.F. (2014) *glUV: A global UV-B radiation dataset for macroecological studies*, **Methods in Ecology and Evolution**, 5: 372–383. doi: [10.1111/2041-210X.12168](http://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12168)
