---
name: T6.4 Temperate alpine grasslands and shrublands
biome: T6. Polar/alpine (cryogenic) biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T6.4
biomecode: T6
contributors: DA Keith, F Essl, KR Young, CH Körner
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Mountain systems beyond the cold climatic treeline are dominated by grasses, herbs, or low shrubs (typically <1 m tall). Moderate-low and strictly seasonal productivity is limited by deep winter snow cover, extreme cold and frost during spring thaw, short growing seasons, desiccating winds, and, in some cases, by mass movement. Vegetation comprises a typically continuous cover of plants including bryophytes, lichens, C3 grasses, sedges, forbs, and dwarf shrubs including cushion growth forms. However, the cover of vascular plants may be much lower in low-rainfall regions or in sites exposed to strong desiccating winds and often characterised by dwarf shrubs and lichens that grow on rocks (e.g. fjaeldmark). Throughout the world, alpine ecosystems are defined by the physiological temperature limits of trees, which are excluded where the growing season (i.e. days >0.9°C) is less than 90-94 days, with mean temperatures less than 6.5°C across the growing season. Other plants have morphological and ecophysiological traits to protect buds, leaves, and reproductive tissues from extreme cold, including growth forms with many branches, diminutive leaf sizes, sclerophylly, vegetative propagation, and cold-stratification dormancy. The vertebrate fauna includes a few hibernating residents and migratory herbivores and predators that are nomadic or have large home ranges. Aestivating insects include katydids, dipterans, and hemipterans. Local endemism and beta-diversity may be high due to steep elevational gradients, microhabitat heterogeneity, and topographic barriers to dispersal between mountain ranges, with evidence of both facilitation and competition.

# Ecological Drivers

Winters are long and cold, while summers are short and mild. Seasonal snow up to several metres deep provides insulation to over-wintering plants and animals. Severe frosts and desiccating winds characterise the spring thaw and exposed ridges and slopes. Severe storms may result from orographic-atmospheric instability. Typically there is a large precipitation surplus, but deficits occur in some regions. Steep elevational gradients and variation in micro-topography and aspect promote microclimatic heterogeneity. Steep slopes are subjected to periodic mass movements, which destroy surface vegetation.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mountains in the temperate and boreal zones of the Americas, Europe, central Eurasia, west and north Asia, Australia, and New Zealand.

{% capture map_det %}
Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al., 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently, they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Körner C (2004) Mountain biodiversity: its causes and function.  Ambio,  Special Report Number 13. The Royal Colloquium: Mountain Areas: A Global Resource, pp. 11-17. Springer, Berlin.
* Körner C (2012) Alpine treelines. (Springer: Basel)
* Paulsen J, Körner C (2014) A climate-based model to predict potential treeline position around the globe. Alpine Botany 124, 1-12
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
