---
name: T6.5 Tropical alpine grasslands and herbfields
biome: T6. Polar/alpine (cryogenic) biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T6.5
biomecode: T6
contributors: DA Keith, A Etter
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Treeless mountain systems dominated by an open to dense cover of cold-tolerant C3 perennial tussock grasses, herbs, small shrubs, and distinctive arborescent rosette or cushion growth forms. Lichens and bryophytes are also common. Productivity is low, dependent on autochthonous energy, and limited by cold temperatures, diurnal freeze-thaw cycles, and desiccating conditions, but not by a short growing season (as in T6.4). Elfin forms of tropical montane forests (T1.3) occupy sheltered gullies and lower elevations. Diversity is low to moderate but endemism is high among some taxa, reflecting steep elevational gradients, microhabitat heterogeneity, and topographic insularity, which restricts dispersal. Solifluction (i.e. the slow flow of saturated soil downslope) restricts seedling establishment to stable microsites. Plants have traits to protect buds, leaves, and reproductive tissues from diurnal cold and transient desiccation stress, including ramulose (i.e. many-branched), cushion, and rosette growth forms, insulation from marcescent (i.e. dead) leaves or pectin fluids, diminutive leaf sizes, leaf pubescence, water storage in stem-pith, and vegetative propagation. Most plants are long-lived and some rosette forms are semelparous. Cuticle and epidermal layers reduce UV-B transmission to photosynthetic tissues. Plant coexistence is mediated by competition, facilitation, herbivory (vertebrate and invertebrate), and fire regimes. Simple trophic networks include itinerant large herbivores and predators from adjacent lowland savannas as well as resident reptiles, small mammals, and macro-invertebrates.

# Ecological Drivers

Cold nights (as low as −10°C) and mild days (up to 15°C) produce low mean temperatures and diurnal freeze-thaw cycles, but seasonal temperature range is small and freezing temperatures are short-lived. Cloud cover and precipitation are unseasonal in equatorial latitudes or seasonal in the monsoonal tropics. Strong orographic effects result in an overall precipitation surplus and snow and fog are common, but desiccating conditions may occur during intervals between precipitation events, with morning insolation also increasing moisture stress when roots are cold. Exposure to UV-B radiation is very high. Substrates are typically rocky and shallow (with low moisture retention capacity) and exposed to solifluction. Micro-topographic heterogeneity influences fine-scale spatial variation in moisture availability. Steep slopes are subjected to periodic mass movements, which destroy surface vegetation. Low-intensity fires may be ignited by lightning or spread upslope from lowland savannas, but these occur infrequently at multi-decadal intervals.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Restricted mountainous areas of tropical Central and South America, East and West Africa, and Southeast Asia.

{% capture map_det %}
Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu et al., 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein et al., 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Smith AP, Young TP (1987) Tropical alpine plant ecology.  Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 18: 137-58.
### Map References
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*, **BioScience** 67: 534–545. DOI:[10.1093/biosci/bix014](https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014). [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz. 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling. Global Ecology and Biogeography 23(9): 1031-1045.
