---
name: T7.4 Urban and industrial ecosystems
biome: T7. Intensive land-use biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T7.4
biomecode: T7
contributors: DA Keith, RT Corlett
mapcontributors: DA Keith, JR Ferrer-Paris
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:56:53
---
# Ecological Traits
 
These systems are structurally complex and highly heterogeneous fine-scale spatial mosaics of diverse patch types that may be recognised in fine-scale land use classifications. These include: a) buildings; b) paved surfaces; c) transport infrastructure: d) treed areas; e) grassed areas; f) gardens; g) mines or quarries; h) bare ground; and i) refuse areas. Patch mosaics are dynamic over decadal time scales and driven by socio-ecological feedbacks and a human population that is highly stratified, functionally, socially and economically. Interactions among patch types and human social behaviours produce emergent properties and complex feedbacks among components within each system and interactions with other ecosystem types. Unlike most other terrestrial ecosystems, the energy, water and nutrient sources of urban systems are highly allochthonous and processes within urban systems drive profound and extensive global changes in land use, land cover, biodiversity, hydrology, and climate through both resource consumption and waste discharge. Biotic community structure is characterised by low functional and taxonomic diversity, highly skewed rank-abundance relationships and relict local endemism. Trophic networks are simplified and sparse and each node is dominated by few taxa. Urban biota include humans, dependents (e.g. companion animals and cultivars), opportunists and vagrants, and legacy biota whose establishment pre-dates urbanisation. Many biota have highly plastic realised niches, traits enabling wide dispersal, high fecundity, and short generation times. The persistence of dependent biota is maintained by human-assisted migration, managed reproduction, genetic manipulation, amelioration of temperatures, and intensive supplementation of nutrients, food, and water. Pest biota are controlled by the application of herbicides and pesticides or culling with collateral impacts on non-target biota.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Humans influence the availability of water, nutrients, and energy through governance systems for resource importation and indirectly through interactions and feedbacks. Light is enhanced artificially at night. Urban temperature regimes are elevated by the anthropogenic conversion of chemical energy to heat and the absorption of solar energy by buildings and paved surfaces. However, temperatures may be locally ameliorated within buildings. Surface water runoff is enhanced and percolation is reduced by sealed surfaces. Chemical and particulate air pollution, as well as light and noise pollution may affect biota. Infrastructure development and renewal, driven by socio-economic processes, as well as natural disasters (e.g. storms, floods, earthquakes, and tsunami) create recurring disturbances. There is frequent movement of humans and associated biota and matter between cities.
 
# Diagramatic assembly model
 
{% include DAM.html %}
 
# Distribution
 
Extensively scattered through equatorial to subpolar latitudes from sea-level to submontane altitudes, mostly in proximity to the coast, rivers or lakes, especially in North America, Western Europe and Japan, as well as India, China, and Brazil. Land use maps depict fine-scale patch types listed above.

{% capture map_det %}
The indicative distribution of Urban and infrastructure lands was estimated using spatial data for night light brightness (values >0 in NCEI 2019; Cinzano, et al.  2019)
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Alberti M, Marzluff JM, Shulenberger E, Bradley G, Ryan C, Zumbrunnen C (2003) Integrating humans into ecology: opportunities and challenges for studying urban ecosystems. BioScience 53:1169-1179.
* Grimm NB, Faeth SH, Golubiewski NE, Redman CL, Wu J, Bai X, Briggs JM (2008) Global change and the ecology of cities. Science 319: 756-760.
### Map References
* Cinzano P, Falchi F, C. D. Elvidge CD (2019). The world atlas of the artificial night sky brightness. Copyright Royal Astronomical Society. Reproduced from the Monthly Notices of the RAS by permission of Blackwell Science. (University of Padova & NOAA National Geophysical Data Center, Boulder) http://www.inquinamentoluminoso.it/worldatlas/pages/fig1.htm 
* *VIIRS Day/Night Band Nighttime Lights*, Version 1; **Earth Observation Group, NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI)**. [Data-set]( https://eogdata.mines.edu/download_dnb_composites.html)
