---
name: T7.5 Derived semi-natural pastures and old fields
biome: T7. Intensive land-use biome
realm: Terrestrial
code: T7.5
biomecode: T7
contributors: DA Keith, PW Bogaart
mapcontributors: JR Ferrer-Paris, DA Keith
version: v2.1 (2022-04-06)
---
# Ecosystem properties

Extensive ‘semi-natural’ grasslands and open shrublands exist where woody components of vegetation have been removed or greatly modified for agricultural land uses. Hence they have been ‘derived’ from a range of other ecosystems (mostly from biomes biome T1, biome T2, biome T3, biome T4, a few from biome T5). Remaining vegetation includes a substantial component of local indigenous species, as well as an introduced exotic element, providing habitat for a mixed indigenous and non-indigenous fauna. Although structurally simpler at site scales than the systems from which they were derived, spatial complexity may be greater in fragmented landscapes and they often harbour appreciable diversity of native organisms, including some no longer present in ‘natural’ ecosystems. Dominant plant growth forms include tussock or stoloniferous grasses and forbs, with or without non-vascular plants, shrubs and scattered trees. These support microbial decomposers and diverse invertebrate groups that function as detritivores, herbivores and predators, as well as vertebrate herbivores and predators characteristic of open habitats. Energy sources are primarily autochthonous, with varying levels of indirect allochthonous subsidies (e.g. via surface water sheet flows), but few managed inputs (cf. T7.2). Productivity can be low or high, depending on climate and substrate, but is generally lower and more stable than more intensive anthropogenic systems (T7.1-T7.3). Trophic networks include all levels, but complexity and diversity depends on the species pool, legacies from antecedent ecosystems, successional stage, and management regimes. These novel ecosystems may persist in a steady self-maintaining state, or undergo passive transformation (e.g. oldfield succession) unless actively maintained in disequilibrium. For example, removal of domestic herbivores may initiate transition to tree-dominated ecosystems.

# Ecological Drivers

Availability of water and nutrients varies depending on local climate, substrate and terrain (hence surface water movement and infiltration). The structure, function and composition of these ecosystems are shaped by legacy features of antecedent systems from which they were derived, as well as ongoing and past human activities. These activities may reflect production and/or conservation goals, or abandonment. They include active removal of woody vegetation, management of vertebrate herbivores, introductions of biota, control of ‘pest’ biota, manipulation of disturbance regimes, drainage and earthworks, etc. Fertilisers and pesticides are not commonly applied.

# Diagramatic assembly model

{% include DAM.html %}

# Distribution

Mostly in temperate to tropical climates across all land masses. See map caveats (Table S4.1).

{% capture map_det %}
We used land use and land suitability datasets for the year 2000 (Erb et al. 2007) and Human Appropriation of Net Primary Productivity (Haberl et al. 2007) to estimate the distribution of semi-natural pastures. We selected areas that were: a) suitable for livestock grazing; b) had a greater proportion of grazing lands than croplands or forestry lands (grazing> forestry and grazing>cropland); c) had intermediate to high cover of grazing lands (>30%); and intermediate to high estimates of Human Appropriation of Net Primary Productivity (20%<HANPP <90%). In combination, these conditions excluded intensive pastures and wild rangelands with low productivity for livestocj grazing. We classified areas with the highest grazing suitability (class 1 in Erb et al. 2007) as major occurrences, and areas with the second highest grazing suitability (class 2) as minor occurrences. We acknowledge significant untested assumptions and limitations on spatial predictors that challenge the global-scale delineation of pasture ecosystems with varied levels of human influence. We therefore advise appropriate caution in use of the spatial data for quantitative analysis.
{% endcapture %}
{% include MAP.html %}

## References
### Main References
* Cramer VA, Hobbs RJ, Standish RJ (2008) *What's new about old fields? Land abandonment and ecosystem assembly*. **Trends in Ecology & Evolution** 23, 104-112.
* García-Feced, Weissteiner CJ, Baraldi A, Paracchini MA, Maes J, Zulian G, Kempen M, Elbersen B, Pérez-Sob M (2015) *Semi-natural vegetation in agricultural land: European map and links to ecosystem service supply*. **Agronomy for Sustainable Development** 35, 273–283.
* Krauss J, Bommarco R, Guardiola M, Heikkinen RK, Helm A, Kuussaari M, Lindborg R, Öckinger E, Pärtel M, Pino J, Pöyry J, Raatikainen KM, Sang A, Stefanescu C, Teder T, Zobel M, Steffan-Dewenter I (2010) *Habitat fragmentation causes immediate and time delayed biodiversity loss at different trophic levels*. **Ecology Letters** 13, 597–605.
### Map References
* Karl-Heinz Erb, Veronika Gaube, Fridolin Krausmann, Christoph Plutzar, Alberte Bondeau & Helmut Haberl (2007) A comprehensive global 5 min resolution land-use data set for the year 2000 consistent with national census data, Journal of Land Use Science, 2:3, 191-224, DOI: 10.1080/17474230701622981
* Quantifying and mapping the human appropriation of net primary production in earth s terrestrial ecosystems
Helmut Haberl, K. Heinz Erb, Fridolin Krausmann, Veronika Gaube, Alberte Bondeau, Christoph Plutzar, Simone Gingrich, Wolfgang Lucht, Marina Fischer-Kowalski
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Jul 2007, 104 (31) 12942-12947; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704243104
